Word of mouth communication and fliers and social media - clear and simple communication ;communication: how do we find out about events like this? would be nice if there was 1 source and everything was there. Community oriented events. When you find something good, I wonder, "why didn't I know about this?";Some of the signs on government buildings have incorrect Spanish. ;Technology of communicating and non technology way of communicating is important;Durham One Call is perfect and direct it ;Keeping services like Durham One Call in place for great customer service;more accessible information for conversations around programs and  more environments for these conversations and go to the community instead of making them come here;Transparent - seeing the comments, access to information;Information stays in certain pockets, want to share that information;During budgeting, translate, better communicate, so that citizens can know what's going on;public information on how to leverage programs for residents;clearinghouse for information from neighborhoods-single-source resource; neighborhoods need access to internet to participate;transparent serving the community, access to information;Use TV to do notifications for land use processes and changes;there needs to be more news about this and zoning - TV, radio;I'm concerned with how the city doesn't give us enough notice on these things. ;more simple vocab in the UDO;Comp. Plan needs to be a layout for neighborhoods.  Emory woods.  the city didn't give them a tree buffer between them and the road = > need notifications of these things so residents can ACCESS meetings and provide feedback  and  work together;Communication (Engage Durham) - the communication hasn't been well broadcasted. - city websites, twitter (week ago), email, from coworker, word of mouth. ;Communication hasn't been great with the process - people in neighborhoods didn't know anything about (Engage Durham) use mail for communication avenues, postcards, use other channels other than social media;Want to change: communication from the city about zoning. Web versions and others.;News in Durham where did the blogs go? Open Durham. Current matters.;Tracking everything is important. Measuring it and timelines is very important.;How are we capturing input for this plan through technology?;Online tool: You're a Durham resident, click here, use technology to simplify information. Spanish, better information. Partner with libraries; accessibility for different groups. Communicate through water bill. ;would like to see results of plan-what are lessons learned;How do we find out what changes are occurring in real time?;Phone call accessibility;People need to know how to get information--listserv, social media, etc. Offline populations need assistance for information and City services;Does the comp plan progress info show up on the web?;Broader communication for when and if new development occurs.;Do a better job of telling people about the could stuff going on.;Hard for people to get things delivered via telephone (not smart phone).;phone call accessibility;A place for those who are visually impaired: greater services by GoDurham, focus on pedestrian safety;ease of access;Curb outs, ramps need to be considered so that it becomes more accessible. ;More sidewalks, comprehensive curb cuts and accessibility. ;Disability accessibility;Also, elderly people, people with+A21 disabilities. Some of the sidewalks, even with electric wheelchair are hard to navigate;Think about folks who don't have access to a car or have disabilities or cannot access a bus stop;Disabled person negotiating construction sites that are not properly quartered off;affordable, integrated, accessible;Access to affordable and local child care;Equitable, diverse, affordable for everyone;Affordability and diversity ;what's changed the most: affordability, inability to downsize, downtown as a destination ;Soul of the city has changed in good ways (Downtown is nice) but we are losing our grit (affordable housing and diversity being pushed out) socio economic and racial diversity should remain with conscious effort. ;people who are here, especially low-income people, can afford to stay;300/500 E main Street is a positive, but only happened after Durham CAN outrage;Real estate people don't think twice about charging more for a house.;Neighborhoods and maintaining affordability. Putting a value on diverse and mixed income neighborhoods. ;Affordability - small business neighborhood scale character. ;Themes overall: transportation, community character, affordability;affordability for all Durham residents;Affordability is important.  what's the point of having a nice city if you can't afford to live here and enjoy it?;My kids can afford to live here after college;Affordable cost in a growing city;Integrated, affordable in a growing city, accessibilityx2, shared prosperity, healthy food access, low income housing;Also affordability. Where housing is affordable, you can get a mix.;I worry that my kids won’t be able to afford to live here.;affordability for everything ;Where does the money come from and then how do we balance our needs and choices;Selling land to stay afloat  and  or timber cutting decreasing value ;Durham should be a place anyone can afford to live, work, and raise kids;Affordable housing for all;Affordability at different levels;becoming too expensive to live here for the middle class;Groceries cost way too much;Affordable for other areas in Durham vs downtown;Affordability;City is becoming expensive for regular folks to stay.;Stay as affordable as possible.;The City is too expensive. Traffic is getting worse. People are less happy.;Relatively affordable compared to Chapel Hill.;Durham offers one of the best value for quality of life. ;Don’t' want Durham to become unaffordable to people who love here.;Stay affordable!;future Durham: Durham remains affordable, working couples can afford a home;future Durham: everything will be affordable;concerns about affordability-concerns about becoming Seattle;Ability to buy a house in Durham.;Affordability - so many expensive condos. Help protect small mom and pop shops. Durham is not like any other city. Keep that.;Cost can vary based on how we grow - sprawl vs. infill.;Pricing diversity.;affordability at different levels;Affordable theatre and arts;Arts city  and  food city;art, beer, culture is good; makes Durham an interesting place to be;Public art event on history of Durham felt comfortable taking part. Duke homestead lectures.;20 years-what do we look like? public art: more focus of arts, art incorporated in all aspects of infrastructure, public choice in murals and displays;more artistic and learning and interactive activities;small-scale performance space like Beyu;outdoor music and people watching, near where I live;more artist co-working spaces; like we-work for artists, film-makers;Healthy arts community - city owned theater, art spaces;More public arts ;space for music and arts ;invest in local artist, use in public art;Appreciation for all of the arts here - helps bring people here DPAC a huge draw - #1 in region;More public art in connection with educational messages (ex on the highway);Affordable access to arts;Opp in arts presents;Access and  Opportunities to arts in the community;Art;The need to support the arts in Durham e.g. control of rising rents so artists can live or work in Durham.;Sculpture and murals downtown.;Arts - more artisan spaces.;Liberty warehouse - plight of artist. Rents are rising. Pushed out of golden belt, downtown investment in arts community. Supporting artists, not just;Community arts event throughout the community.;future Durham: art scattered around the city for all to enjoy;future Durham: free community art events throughout the city;art! public art!;Arts and culture, a go-to thing when they think of Durham.;Arts and culture focus ;Support the arts so that Durham is the place people want to be.;Public art DT is a plus but better City wide.;Like what Durham has done with public art in downtown - hope city will do this more broadly throughout the city. ;Making things human centered.;Feeling of belonging.;People come here to take care of their families. Let's not close the door. ;New offices with  one address with  15 independent barber shops - good model off Woodcroft ;Space welcoming to all, safe physically and ideologically, uplifts entrepreneurs, local ones-being pushed out of downtown (rent prices)-support diverse businesses;Promote diverse business districts;Commercial opportunity  and  diversity;Now downtown has less Black businesses. lot of trust issues with Black people and government;I do like there's a lot of non-chain restaurants. But in the new building downtown it's more chains, franchise restaurants require a lot of parking?;Help protect areas that are still affordable. Preserve local businesses. Existing 60's era homes that were affordable being bought and torn down and  and rebuilt as expensive bigger homes.;Inclusive, sustainable, commercial development;The StrongTowns Movement "Charles Mohone"-organic developments of small scale experiments and build off what works. Low investments with short term commitment that can be built up. Look into businesses like small family stores; their revenue returns higher;Access for small businesses; affordable rent and assistance for start-ups;keep local businesses and restaurants;As Durham grows, stays a place for local business in downtown and central neighborhoods. Keep the should of Durham - mix of local shops, restaurants, etc.;Walkable neighborhood retail corridors;In other cities, it's not just downtown that is exciting. Smaller communities within the larger community. I'm not a fan of So. Square and Target. Would prefer smaller community-based commerce.;the East Durham area near pie shop looks like a little main street to be activated to be an amenity to that area. Provide small business loans to neighborhood spots like that. ;Have more blocks full of local businesses that are walkable distance from neighborhoods;Want to see affordable infill internships for people to learn new skills. People working jobs. One in evening learn new things. Would cut down on parts of Durham where you don't want to go. ;Options for in home and in commercial space - health department is flexible and that's good. Some need variance;losing character-95 and 147 connection could pull traffic away from downtown and impact business;concerns Latinx businesses on Roxboro closing;maintain and grow back businesses in downtown;Promote smart economic development to recruit industry to enable residents to have livable wage.;Diversity of business types in different areas. Change zoning to allow mix of use types throughout city and county.;Economic development everywhere to attract and grow businesses;Self sustaining businesses;Business ecosystem;Commercial space that is available to small business and micro business start ups;I wish more of the re-zoning was for business development and less for housing development;Small business local investment;more rezoning for business vs residential; too much housing going up not enough jobs;small local developers and small businesses - remove barriers to entry;Rezoning for business startups close jobs would allow people to stay in Durham;Microbusinesses, teenagers engaged jobs for everyone - programs like Trosa - but that program is flawed;Put small local business investors from Durham on our developments;I would like the plan to support small business developers;Commerce;Opportunity;sustainable economy, place for innovation ;small businesses ;Internship Opportunity brought some to Durham; lots of those economic opportunities are coming to Durham;Supporting local business;more commercial stores in and closer to neighborhoods;Zoning to allow small retail in neighborhoods;Doesn't want to change: character of Durham. Local businesses are good. Not as many national chains. Artistic. Events. Diverse nature of Durham.;East Durham needs more business. The city should support entrepreneurs. Financial support - accessible loans.;I like the little shops on ninth St.;like the local businesses - fear of chains coming in; accommodate various economic levels of restaurants and shops;Fosters new businesses (mostly the small ones);Re-energize existing business (ex Northgate or Lakewood).  look at North Hills in Raleigh as an example, through rezoning (commercial on the bottom, residential on top) or something to draw people's attention;The city recruits anchor stores into shopping centers that show sign of decadence (mixed feelings around the table at this point);locally around business-more incentives for independent;No more big box store development and more space for local businesses;Allowing businesses to keep their places;Small businesses;Love the fact that small biz can survive (earn a living) in Durham. Entrepreneurship is amazing;Lots of entrepreneurs ;Opportunities for cooperatives, collaboratives, open air markets, ;small businesses can thrive.;local business;Local business not liking.;Losing independent businesses for chains;Need more entry points (farmers market, incubators for restaurants, construction and technology);Small business doesn't benefit from sprawl (Trent rd. - funeral homes, barber shops out of houses);City could prioritize neighborhoods association to welcome people.;contact pastors to get the word out-invite pastors personally;Better communication and partnership;Supported communities that are connected;Create a more connected Durham;what I like about Durham: sense of connectedness and familiarity;A Durham that is truly integrated - economically, racially, culturally, where everyone feels at home;sense of joy, possibility, and mutual solidarity;Sharing experiences with longer-term residents;see a Durham with more social engagement. Gun Violence, affordable housing, common topics. Have more interneighborhood councils-a more vibrant community engagement on a on-going basis;Community building efforts (re-building neighborhood identities at communal care);Social Parks; connecting and gathering; less isolation;Knowing neighbors--creates a sense of safety;Tutoring, reading, volunteer programs in libraries needed more consistently. Need volunteer coordinator and background check system so adult community members could help. Services days like habitat for humanity;We know our neighbors and work together;Employment  and  civic projects  and  community led projects;people who live here know each other and work together ;Community;Internet causes lack of community ;Open community ;Focus on neighborhoods;everyone treated with dignity and respect, learning from each other;looking at community what was done in the past;Smaller community, run into some people, build relationships with others in the community;10% of people can make 100% of change;Rebuild community - ongoing conversations, community dinners, street party so not just own neighborhood but city-wide or multi-neighborhood;Clusters of community that foster interaction and de-silo our digital world;friendly;connect communities (Lakewood, re-energize);A robust system to resolve conflict, socially. a way to bring everyone together;People in houses, not community;Lack of neighborliness as many people have AC and don't sit on their porches anymore;Divided to not;Attitudes for helping each other; we want to have each other's back;Church was one of the biggest centers for support. What can churches do to engage the community?;People have become cut-off from each other;Intergenerational neighborhoods and friendships;Churches previously were central to communities - now not as much.;a city, but that is thriving-cohesiveness and collaboration and de-silos;personalities of regional communities is important-in Durham, it's what we care about (we care about our causes);People care about each other;Support for communities (physical and organizing, being connected);Vibrant community integration of communities;Community cohesive;Communities where people talk to each other;Volunteer coordinator for City and County libraries. Centralized contacts to mobilize local resources to build community.;Need for more opportunities for the community to safely serve to support each other - formal mechanisms needed. Unified screening process;Need more community involvement to people want to help (get people to events, locations, etc.) no mechanism in place (countywide, standardized background check). Give time in several places with  one background check;Like community involvement.;What I like about Durham:;It's a community - people care about each other;What I like about Durham:;Community engagement;Community.;People with a sense of ownership  and  belonging.;Caring about your neighbors.;"Border-like" fences are not good.;Cultural districts representation of community.;future Durham: I think that people will be very open and a lot friendlier;like about transit in Durham and Downtown: community action;When people who have degrees of freedom live close to people who don't families can care for each other. When neighbor has a problem, they can call.;Across neighbor connectivity.;African Americans and Black people indigenous to Durham need to be considered separate from Hispanic community because we have lost more and been here longer;restore Hayti - destroyed "urban renewal" - and redress impacts of red-lining and segregation.;147 came through and crushed communities - what is next?;Critical examination and reparation of past and current zoning decisions (i.e.: Hwy 147);how do we address historical traumas rooted in land, development, etc.? ex. Braggtown;how do we address the historical trauma present in the place we live when we think about how we interact with land, neighborhoods, and people who live here. Particularly long time residents;How can we truly ask and listen to communities in our city who have been most impacted by oppression? historical trauma in our city-the history of slavery and exploitation of African Americans has direct connection with this history of redlining and disinvestment and destruction in Black communities. what would Durham need to do to reckon with this history? How do we have a process of equitable engagement which takes into account the specific historical and present context? How does this potential equitable engagement process work? Who could be involved? Who could help envision? What are we not seeing? What is being left out?;Hard conversations about what was done in the past and doing now;Trauma that many generations have endured in Durham without support. How do we support families who have endured trauma who had no support? ;An ideal Durham is probably impossible;This is making us feel sad!;We have a smart community - we should be able to work together to address many issues. ;Seems like many issues we are talking are connected - example - community garden creates healthy food and green spaces, watershed, etc.;Ways to link groups with similar goals to work together towards specific accomplishments for example: connecting green spaces. ;Solve problems collectively. ;Channel spirit of volunteerism. ;Crime, community, parents;crime-nonprofit collaboration-police chief, holistic approach;Officers should live and know the community they serve ;We're criminalizing poverty; systemic issues; affordable housing bond is a Band-Aid;3 legged stool includes enforcement. Hispanic community afraid to call the police;Crime--poverty a byproduct of revitalization; especially to youth; how quick this engagement came to people, communication was lacking;Solution for right now. Gun laws. Why do these kids have guns?;NE Central Durham is no longer the highest crime area. ;over and hyper policing of residents of color. need alternatives to policing;as Durham population keeps going up, we need more police officers to keep up with the increased need;I am concerned about over-policing and hyper policing of people of color in our city which does not actually increase safety for all residents. we need alternatives to policing which increase safety for all Durham residents. not privilege the fears and concerns of some residents;we need better trained police. police only sit in Black neighborhood. police were made for protecting whites from Black folks;Criminal activity is an outlier, not the norm;Crime?;deal with crime, bad shootings etc.;One where there's much lower count of crime;one where there is an adequate law enforcement agency within the city;Things that can be done to lower crime, watch the news, everything from homicides to pulling car doors. Would be good to have a comprehensive plan to reduce property crime,  other crime. Don't want to steer political, but needs to be an actual plan to improve.;Police - answers education, housing, jobs > deficit in these 3 = crime;Police aren't trained to work with kids;give people a reason not to commit crime;police treat everyone as suspects;police should meet and get to know the community ;police officers should treat people like they want to be treated ;People have trust with  police officers that are living in the community .  they need to be part of the city in more than just enforcement;Durham's crime got overhyped, but there are just a few pockets;Uptick in crime;lack of support for the police department by City Council (by not hiring more officers);Overinvest in law enforcement;lack of faith in Police officers;relying more on community support to deter crime;Divest from law enforcement;Concerns with police interaction between people.;More policeman and better training;Police Training need to consider a wider range of situations and types of people populations;More effective community-based policing and better training;more staffing for police and the vote against it;Sufficiently resources for our police. ;Gun violence. Discourage people from going places. Spreading to new places. Getting worse.;Calling police can be challenging. ;Police do not hassle me or stop me. ;Durham beyond policing - funding directed (60% of City budget is policing) 1. Part time workers increase 2. legal aid increases.;Community led safety and wellness task force number 1 thing is mental health - mobile mental health crisis response. Developing alternatives.;As Durham's population keeps going up, we need more police officers to keep with the increased need.;alternatives to calling police and de-escalation;crime-why do we have a jail downtown that is one of the larger buildings;Concerned about crime. Chief of police asked for staff, was denied by Council;Police officer training - keep officers who are trained - Durham is losing officers to smaller towns;crime, community, parents;Boys and Girls club model for folks reentering community after release from prison, maybe for homeless as well;Criminal justice=restorative justice;There are adequate resources and things in place to ensure ex-inmates stay out of prison. Zero recidivism.;In my ideal Durham, the jail isn't one of the tallest buildings in the City.;Keeping the cultural side of Durham present; encourage more mixing with purposeful programs;Cosmopolitan: open minded, diverse, arts, research, embrace all parts;We are marketing culture, if we lose it, there is no reason to visit here.;Like the culture;erosion of culture (Black Culture);Have a robust cultural area;Access to culturally appropriate things for me (Asian and native American);Losing the "small town" feel.;What I like about Durham:;Accessibility to cultural;Black folks still not making the amount of money it takes to make to live in Durham;Need to all respect each other. Black people trying to live, survive or thrive;African Americans and black people indigenous to Durham need to be considered  separate from Hispanic community because we have lost more and been here longer;"White Town" in the downtown area as things have gotten too expensive and exclusive;Not everything has to fall into the hands of white people;Density while maintaining diversity;More density with development incentives; less sprawl;Low density, affordable, transit, walkable;Dense development with mixed use, green spaces and trees, and accessible to all citizens. ;Live in Durham 5 years, density development is eroding the natural open space, please preserve the open space aspects.;Density - reliability with transportation and other vehicles - dedicated lanes and more reliability;large, affordable, dense, urban center with  transit for outside the core. Nodes of density outside downtown with  stores and rapid bus into downtown. DC bus goes from every large center to another. Strange we only have one central hub - I have to come into downtown to go 8 streets over. Connect outside of downtown. 2 hours southpoint to downtown to Raleigh? Too long;Even more density with more open spaces and inclusivity. Investment in job training for less fortunate.;More dense housing and multizoning while maintaining affordability;It would be nice if the density had a limit on height.;Stack and pack (vertical density);SFH equates to privacy; vertical  and  MF residential allows people to be tracked;I support responsible increases of density and support zoning that allows for "missing middle" housing.;Preserve single family home neighborhoods!;I hate giant parking lots - the one in front of the Trosa thrift store could fit a whole neighborhood in it.;preserve single family homes and neighborhoods;stack and pack is happening - building higher - people who live in apartments give up their rights - their visitors have to sign in;smartly dense;Density nearer to city center but how do we do this without 10 story building near neighborhoods; better transitions;Chicago and DC = nice mix of housing types and density;Want to do density but protect our water, tree canopy;Doesn't want: crowding makes parking harder to find. Puts pressure on neighborhoods that are near.;Less massing and smaller footprints for multi-family housing more inclusivity in housing- housing security ;Keep trend of people living downtown and densifying- virtuous circles around this;Corridor focus and development practices and dense corridors;Love cluster housing;Urban Land Institute report - inner suburbs becoming more urban like; looking at employment centers and better connect to transit; looking at nodal centers with higher density of development - rail all be in downtown;moving closer together because we have to-unified on housing from city and county collaboration;Density ;More density and reduce "Not in my back yard" approach and mentality;Light rail wasn't going to serve me. It was going to cause chaos and congestion. This is an opportunity to do something that makes sense in a low-density region. I don't want density in my neighborhood.;limit tear downs, increase density for rich folks;have pockets of density instead of one large hub;All the dense apartments in Durham, people will not want to live there forever.;More density;People make the City--planned diversity, small businesses need help and money;Celebrate the diversity and different cultures. Keep that in the forefront of who we are. Bring everyone to the table-new and old residents. Have an honest conversation and celebrate each others differences. All different cultures in the community, thriving and sharing ;Diverse public schools; opportunity for all;What has changed the most: used to talk go the Y and see panhandlers, now MotorCo, etc. has popped up. It's good to see there aren't panhandlers, but I don't see as many people who look like me anymore. We need to keep the diversity: Latinos, Black, white, all dancing together;Doesn't want to change: Other folks. Like old neighborhoods. Atmosphere good attitude towards diverse population. Hispanic pop increasing. Like greenspaces, trails, very walkable city;Loves diversity (generationally, racially, socio-economically) of Durham - in favor of growth but worries we are going to lose the mix then only East Durham is left untouched and affected by expensive growth;What I like about Durham: diversity, history;Diversity-including economics, inclusivity so that everyone feels they belong-inclusive economics;Durham is very diverse but social spaces like breweries aren't; more spaces to cross socio-economic and race barriers;More diversity in neighborhoods;More culturally diverse neighborhoods;Durham should have a better mix of diversity within the community. Education and opportunities for all citizens; making the diversity the top focus.;mix of housing size, family structures and ethnicities  and  races in @ neighborhood;DPAC is so expensive, tends to be an old, white crowd. Beyu, Blue Note, much more mixed crowd.;Loves Hillside Park diversity (mosque, Latinx) wants to see all throughout Durham;diversity- different cultures and backgrounds collectively grow together (stay diverse);people like different things ;the quirkiness;friendliness of other diverse community members;We like the character and diversity of Durham;Doesn't want to change: diversity and character. Black voices in Durham. Exposed to different viewpoints and perspectives. Local stuff.;More diversity again;Diverse;Town of diversity;Socioeconomic and racial diversity throughout the city and downtown;beautiful history, diverse population, locals are great, no place where there is not welcoming, a place where all people live and engage together and can enjoy together;we're serious about diversity-let's put action behind it-we can't just play pretend, be honest, include youth, who are our places for?!;Change - more diversity in schools and neighborhoods;Diversity - income, - race, -housing, - schools;Resident diversity;Generational, Racial, Socioeconomic - All diversity aspects;Intentional focus on keeping us diverse (not like Raleigh and Chapel hill). ;Need committed focus on mix and keeping it;What I like about Durham:;The people! Diverse, all walks of life;One thing I'd like to keep - diversity of community.;Ideal: stay diverse - racial, ethnic, SE status.;Love about Durham - diverse. ;Durham has diversity of activities and people - people are now finding out about Durham.;Cross-section of people from different races and SES.;Mixed income everywhere ;like about transit in Durham and Downtown: opportunities for diverse groups;Keep diversity - growing up it wasn't all white, all black, all Latino, there was no racial majority - that's changing - schools named after African Americans, don't see that elsewhere;Looks diverse all the time;The Planning Model seems like a "bullseye" model: Focus on Downtown and working outward-neighborhoods with local centers. Would like to develop local centers with business and neighborhoods;More place-making could happen outside of American Tobacco, where Aloft is;I like that you can walk downtown and run into any kind of activity. If we don't have more varied housing, the diversity of activities will go away because we'll only be building for one type of person;Keeping downtown affordable - the renaissance is starting to swing toward gentrification;Black homeowners in Downtown and East;Durham's booming downtown vibrancy economy is great, but where is the family, or businesses that used to be there (downtown). we need to find balance.;Preserve heritage, including nice buildings downtown and older neighborhoods. Accessory dwelling units.;Parking lot downtown to YMCA turned into parking lot; More retail downtown, place to do things downtown;Encourage Downtown facilities to use solar utilities;Tax subsidizing downtown is a problem creator.;you have to get downtown to get anywhere;Reduce cars in Downtown Durham;ideal Durham: a vibrant downtown with architecturally interesting buildings. with enough population to support all types of local businesses and so people could walk to fulfill most of their needs to live a happy life;I like Brightleaf Square. In places like Singapore and Berlin, they have a mile of car-free space like Brightleaf;Journalists now come to write articles about D. Town and used to have to seek their services.;Downtown was empty in 90s ;walking downtown recently, it was a different city, at night, people walking and talking and dogs.;Can't feel like I enjoy in Durham's downtown unless;Downtown is changing;If you believe in economies of scale, you need to take employers out of downtown;Nobody has to lose a home just because I want a place to go out to eat downtown;They drove Skippy out of downtown (Funeral home). It was unfortunate.;Downtown Durham is just one big re-lo-ville. ;Distributed downtown;more parking options downtown;Must protect downtown. Blackwell St.;People making lots of money moving downtown;Downtown Durham is running out of property;The downtown Durham is not welcoming to people of color;People in downtown at all hours;Neighborhoods around downtown;Promising steps toward inclusive downtown. ;not only concentrated down town.;Create a downtown feel outside of downtown. Mimic its elements.;in an ideal Durham: downtown has enough types of places to support its population;issues most visible downtown;15 - 20 years ago, didn't want to be downtown, now always crowded. Parking is a problem.;Parking Downtown;Live downtown - enjoy the public plazas and greenways. Lots of people spend time there and different types of people interact. ;Architectural downtown variety.;Duke is huge component in Durham's success. Inclusive in growth dialogue.;reduction of "Duke stronghold";A big opportunity near Duke;Duke takes over city roads. Oregon road. Need to ask more of Duke. They can do more. Taxes and contribute more.;Duke is an awesome neighbor - cross country trail, free music events, etc.;Getting our universities to collaborate Duke NCCU Durham Tech. We are struggling with issues that they can fix.;architectural variety;ideal Durham: preserve architectural character and limit development that is not site-conscious;keep unique architecture;site conscious buildings-ex. Marriott Inn-Residence Inn on main street;Durham was a safe haven for Black people. now largely living in poverty. no jobs, transportation. something drastic happened. Urban renewal-147 did this. broken promises made to Black people;hopes: everyone, regardless of economic status can have a choice to live in Durham;People planned to make it happen - what we have in Durham now - Partners invested in building what we have now. The people (artist, entrepreneurs) were already here. Now, how do we not ruin our character? The gentrification and flipping ruins the character. ;Ideal Durham: Award-winning architecture of sustainable design, instead of "they all look the same" Building code-off the shelf stick framed rather than stable framed buildings. state-leg change needed to help change limitations;I want Durham to be welcoming but respect what is already here.;Economic sustainability - not having a city that is dividing, going to downtown in day  and night has a different feel;Inclusion of North Durham in connection discussions;City provided welcome basket: Tour of Durham and first rides;What I like about Durham: old, new, scrappy;What I like about Durham: activism, being a part of grappeling with challenges;like the scrappy and the revitalization ;Was doing a lot here;it's a great place to be ;It makes me proud to meet people from other cities, other parts of NC, who love Durham and think it's a great place to live.;Character - what makes Durham;Durham is for everyone - affordable, integrated, accessible, beautiful;Community, Data and Technology, Character - what makes Durham Durham, Commerce, Inclusivity, Climate;I have a sense of pride about living in Durham. Maybe an opportunity so more have that feeling;Fell in love with Durham; funky, diverse;Eclectic Durham;People wont overlook Durham ;Shared identity that we can share with others ;Durham is forward thinking about what it wants to be.;Renaissance of Durham;Durham "dirty" again;When lived in Raleigh, had negative impression of Durham. When got to know Durham, liked it better. ;There should be things that welcome you to Durham. Need new signage. Need to manage our image- show what's here. 27 story building with condos here, didn't exist before. ;Change image by focusing on positives- diversity put services in place, strengthening them so we all feel powerful. Perception is reality for person who perceives it. This type of conversation is very important-helps answer who Durham is, then can talk about what Durham needs. Engaging Durham means redefining to fit what is here. ;People make a screwed up face when you say you are moving to Durham;Better shows its uniqueness;Durham is losing it's grits;fascinating place!;Vision--"Don't change it to the point you cannot recognize anymore";What we have now is wonderful, why change?;We don't want to be another Raleigh.;Getting harder to "defend" Durham;Gritty character; activism ;I like the pride that people feel in Durham;I like that Durham is still a can do town. People can effect change, start businesses, without too much bureaucracy ;No boarded up house and empty concrete pads, vacant lots with fences, unpaved streets;Preservation of Durham's community "feel" and character.;Keep diverse, active, civic-minded. Open to new things.;Diverse, active civic minded, open to new things.;ideal Durham: like it is now;Stay as a city of opportunity - young people, immigrants, renters and the poor;Chapel Hill is not a welcoming city and wants Durham to remain so ;people talk about and love Durham;keep its identity despite development-stay Durham, don't lose character;don't want to become Raleigh and Charlotte;like about transit in Durham and Downtown: supportive community;Keep what Durham already is. ;Are we trying to be an original city or be somebody we are not? We are a special place in this state - people don't just pass through. People take notice. Keep should of what Durham has always been. With this comp plan, we either protect that or create a Durham we don't recognize.;A lot of great things in Durham. ;capitalism is more important;no corporations as people, money as speech;Find a way to  do public relations to discourage continuous growth - slow it down.;Concern about engaging with developers at which points? How many times? Will there be an imbalance. ;More controlled design - community approval of development plan;community benefits agreements (CBAs) with developers;How much power should developers have over the community - there are laws that prevent developers from contributing through funds, few developers donate to schools, state legislature;How much power should developers have over Durham.;If you want development you need to kick in on some of the stores;The law could be more creative - we need changes in the state legislature;Durham asking developers for improvements;Who owns Durham? Realistic view of how we can plan with large landowners. ;Imagine Durham with diversity, co-mingling, and thriving. Developers should be contributing- pay for bike lanes, schools. Shouldn't come here, build something and leave;Tax incentives for companies to do the right thing "community benefits agreements";Development is held accountable for reflecting our values collectively.;Will we be notified via email (since you have asked) for this with updates?;public vs. private disclosure;use the City's Instagram page;more transparency, equity-should have all citizens at the decision making table;The community could advocate better if knew how (NCDOT responsibility, etc.);Connected to State and other agencies. People would speak up if people knew where to go and if they knew their voices would be heard. ;Planning-An understanding of jurisdictions and boundaries have on projects. How two or more communities or organizations aren't on the same page. Example: people have frustration with the City when it may not have been the City's decision;Planning is not the "engine" but economic influences seem to push. understanding the influences;More information on what the City and County has influence over vs what they do not. More awareness and messaging about Comp Plan to minimize any misperceptions;getting knowledge out and people feeling safe to participate;needs more transparency. communication-affordable housing bond;mess and outreach and communication ;Community conversations between entities and resources - share information to change trust;PACs are extremely valuable for knowledge and community increase frequency, make more accessible, advertise, better for more community involvement, expand. ;hurting Hispanic people too, they don't come out in the neighborhood;This is really good because I had only a few thing to talk about. This is refreshing to have an opportunity to hear and discuss other topics. This is great.;What I like about Durham: easy to get involved-despite barriers politically;what I like about Durham: there's an attempt to make change for the positive;Award for developers that meet our vision. Recognition award. Raleigh's Sir Raleigh Award. Community (not politicians) are impressed with developers. "Best of the City Award";Can residents have a way of providing awards to developers for providing exactly what we want in our comprehensive plan and delivered what we wanted? Best of?;process controlled by residents with city and developers as stakeholders;concerns: laws around development are completely stacked in favor of developers and their profits, community input is not being engaged in a real way;More developer-community member meetings to establish wants, needs and style--Address the community, unity be community members;we need to make sure the EngageDurham meets all audiences and efforts to push to missed communities;What needs to happen for community input to be useful? Fact-based decision making;Would love decisions in Planning to be pushed by data. Through public input and on-going systems. more qualitative data;lack of data based and research based plans for the future-need to consult profession in a meaningful trusted way;transparency-quantitative and qualitative reviews;expert planning-resident engagement is meaningfully used. collecting data, reviewing and communicating before plans;Use DataWorks to evaluate the process, feedback info to community: localized resident engagement for plan with facilitated sessions; engage with qualitative data; feedback synthesized qualitative and quantitative data to residents; what are the concerns for too much localization?;Having a vision and then figuring it out - not giving up because it's too expensive. All over the world, communities are working together to make a good community.;people in Durham are very involved. increased involvement and activity, social investment in Durham (park of public process);outreach to all pockets;Black people need to be in room. EngageDurham is not how you get people;More education and communication to the public about our policies to help the public become more involved. The Planning and engagement must be reached to all members of public. *process often leaves out key individuals in the long term. There's a place for all of them;Participation and Engagement from a diversity of people, especially in terms of race and socio-economic status;An engagement team that lives in Durham, who have to live in Durham to "get" Durham.  Representation from all person (diverse @ each meeting and office);slow the process down so people can be at the table. churches;concern: given the track record in Durham, concern that the "public meetings" are a sham, to create the illusion of concern. while the real decision making is controlled by the power interest that will profit from the outcome;concern-that Durham will find an excuse to "half-ass" the process by not studying the issues with professional experts and data, but just "wing it" based on hope;Direct feedback of input and impact-how can the City show it's transparent and real?;Words into action; measurable action and goals;Public meetings are a sham and that there is a lack of transparency. There is a plan already decided by leadership and this engagement is used as justification, but not really going to be used to change and impact plan;Durham will find way to "half-ass" the process... EHC process was example used. Portland took few years using data and extensive neighborhood involvement with iteration to find the best solution. Durham didn't' do any of that. Lack of deliberation here;Land use plan--we want people to participate in public hearing processes (City Council, Planning Commission, BOCC);More participation in city's participatory budgeting process;I think PB and this listening and learning sessions are good.;participatory budgeting-it's good, learned a lot, great program, detached from other budgeting decisions, can't look at it holistically. should be broken down on website so that anybody can understand, translate it so that everybody can understand;What needs to happen for community input to be useful?: be useful to see current plan in place to understand what we can actually change. Better understand the impacts of the current plan and lessons learned. -a framework to understand cause and effect. professionals from the outside to evaluate the 2005 plan-quantitative and objective;in an ideal Durham: Changes that happen in Durham are systematic. Keep all our strategies of transit, storm water, planning, etc. to work together. To let the comp plan set a path;Policy that aligns with vision;welcoming environment: go in to all neighborhoods, even ones that don't seem safe;move these meetings to the elementary schools and use the parental network of those schools;a mess right now: making sure all people are allowed to be at table at beginning. stop this separation and segregation that going on in Durham . call this now ;State government has restricted the levers that local government to pull to affect development, transportation, etc. limited ability to affect change due to state law;Greater community engagement with sustainability and more City and County staff in it;Need discussions on who the transit plan is supposed to serve;Action happens when it's trackable;What needs to happen for community input to be useful? how do you show transparency and that real input is used? if done right, more people will come out;Hope: a fact-based plan, assembled incrementally with radical transparency in the process and full disclosure of conflicts of interest by all parties;Hopes: Durham will have better and transparent leadership about what is happening;transparency-serve community;be better at transparency and keep public engaged;Transparency in process for the bond - what's next? How are decisions made? ;More communication and involvement with community about tree planting;Have pizza next time;Data drives policy;Please post listening workshop materials on the website so we can share this experience with our neighbors.;Teach about land use so people know how to engage and advocate;Wants an accountable city; example storm water runoff impacting residential uses; supposedly we have a plan; progress is slow coming;Participating in the comp plan and similar meetings is so important;Heart breaking not to know master plan changes would occur;Reported NCCU changes to media and city council - attending public hearing on special use permit - contacted planning but got wrong information about the type of public hearing that was being conducted;  staff had plenty of time to prep but residents got 1 week notice - 2005 Plan outlined NCCU growth master plan;Too large to push all at once, why not move major initiatives first and add on as deliverables come to fruition;City spends $, major change follows;We need a full time neighborhood advocate to get folks engaged early on!;opportunities to engage in civic projects;Accountable city - when storm water is splashing the house - communication and following up storm water runoff is a huge problem - it will take years to fix;I try to tell people these things are important but they don't come out until its too late;Politics keeps working class people from knowing what they're voting for - they do things out of order on purpose;too large a project to push all at once - if it goes wrong it will affect a lot of people;a community oversight committee is necessary;when we went to a planning meeting, we didn't have correct information - all we could do was submit evidence with only a weeks notice - the engagement is not happening;Need to ensure decision-making is convenient, transparent, equitable, representative of community input.;Holding Engage Durham meetings when it's cold and dark puts a chill on community input.;Using data and technology to help solve problems;Elections - reelection;I also continue to be impressed with the high-quality of city employees.;Data and technology;Data - can you use data to focus where to make investments, where to focus, what to do. Data-driven sense of where is the need. Word of mouth can go so far, but if a place is being forgotten, data can bring it to the forefront;People are voting in elections, proud of the bond referendum. ;Inclusivity - city government is very open, citizen commissions, really cool - always really impressed with city government, storm water, attorney's office, really quality people;Durham can have open conversations;need a way for all time feedback ;hard to know difference between city and county;More city-county consolidation ;I don't see Durham as being innovative at all unless it's some internal process.;Finding ways to more marginalized voices be heard .  seeking communities that need help from city and county .  too many people feel like their voices don't matter .  there are communities in trauma and not being addressed;Boots-on-the-Ground outreach;It comes down to lack of communication, EHC: there were tons of events  and  outreach activities, but not are in black neighborhoods .  have a team that is culturally competent;Door-to-door is old school but works;Record group discussions so that the pressure of trying to write everything down doesn't interrupt the flow of ideas. Redesign room *reduce noise interruption from neighboring tables.;More collaboration from the grown up between city and residents;The strategic campaigning of Mayor and several City Council (Bull City Together);lack of transparency and  City Decision making, with Citizen representation on decision making;decentralized meeting;equitable engagement;Increase seats;Ongoing Community engagement with  City Support - citizen advisory committee helping citizen have a voice to state legislature (like Raleigh);Local engagement; people care about what happens. Is competitive to get on an A.B.;Do: postcards, more posters and postings;Homeless population - should be engaged as well. Reach out to urban ministry rescue mission, etc.);Budget accountability and transparency;Want: more budget transparency - full budget options provided.;Durham One call is awesome! People crack over the stop sign. Durham One-call goes out and fixes the situation quickly.;Durham and a way to listen more to normal people.;Paperless Latinos do not feel part of the community because they know they may not be here tomorrow. An environment of fear has been created. People are afraid to participate.;So far, they have not promoted it a lot.;Many Latinos don't know their rights.;They are afraid to complain.;These days and hours are great, Carrington is a good location hillside;comprehensive plan - threads that ties so much, "together" is multiple threads - woven together;Comprehensive plan shall have conservation.;Too much light - hard to see slideshow. Visually Impaired Group;text in information;Slow the process down so people can be at the table. Churches.;less photo ops and ribbon cutting and more repairs;Streamline elections - don't waste funds;Focus on real root issues;hear from those areas that are experiencing these issues;social justice advocacy is alive here-attractive for in-migration;Good board (City and County);Meaningful work needed;Accessible leadership ;Elections - get folks involved;*"Where you gather influences what you hear"*;People-oriented policies and leadership;Light rail fell apart why should we both with the affordable housing bond?;City officials presented both without transparency. Asked for website or hard copy with details of affordable housing bond. Never received. How make an educated decision? Get burn by one do not trust for next thing;Did not approve reallocation of light rail funds - frustrated;Lack of transparency - frustrated with  new downtown zoning that allows for smaller lots. ;Do not want to hear "State will not allow" or "That's a County thing". Spell out where City cannot make changes and what we are going to do about that. ;Is there wherewithal to fight state legislation or even local government if have issue?;Transparency (across the board) is an issue. someone has to be responsibility and accountability.;Vote for one thing then changes - is that government or comes back as a ballot measure? Especially if a bond matter or issue;Put the power back with  the people paying for it;Come to the community at the front end and not at the end or middle of process;Communication about these meetings was not widespread;There needs to be greater cohesion and cooperation between city and county government administrations;Must report back as changes occur in real time and get additional public input on acceptable alternatives. Early, often, iterative;Accountability Transparency Responsibility;Education on limits of state constitution and how to change it?;Customer service - New, Existing, One ;Transparency, Accountability, Responsibility;Far broader advertisement of engagement activities (neighborhood listservs);Combine Durham City-County, no more piecemeal annexations and service level equity taxes;City council access.;City council members who listen sometimes.;We like engagement.;Now we had a lot of standardized testimony, should have less.;People at the table - need to be invited intentionally, not just with hope that there will be representation. ;Need clearer prioritization - giving input where the need them.;Public officials come to the community.;Where people have as strong of a voice versus corporations.;Lobbying state legislature to give cities more control;More opportunities for students to participate in comp plan (take EngageDurham to high schools);Durham 2030: there is inclusive participation that encourages and proactively solicits ideas from all citizens, regardless of economic status;Broader public engagement in voting participation;no steering committee-major concern (why not?!);circumvent the state and innovation;let's slow down for a second and find out what our community wants (like through Listening and Learning sessions);more engagement -more engagement ambassadors-more events like this;Ensure people not represented at Listening and Learning sessions are met where they are at;Report back to how the city, local level tries to do things, but is locked by state legislature. ;State legislature limits what city can do.;Education on how to participate - opaque by design;Too much jargon;Town Halls that consistently happen in marginalized communities  - in Hayti etc.;Feedback for Durham ENGAGE events: make them greener (eliminate plastic);Reactionary government versus proactive (i.e. affordable housing, leaving next generation with  a big wealth gap, racial issues). Now it's important to fix that.;Don’t' wait until plan is developed to get input. Transparency in communication to everybody.;Engage people at laundromats. Diverse captive audiences.;Government proactive vs. reactive.;Predictable, transparent, effective government!;Reactionary government! ;Be creative, be proactive.;Accountability;Transparency;Responsibility;Development should not be allowed to encroach on waterway buffers.;Voices of Durham having an opportunity to be heard. Do best to engage the community. Make sure there are many opportunities for participation.;Community engagement opportunities e.g. city suburb BBQ;What needs to happen for community input to be useful?;What needs to happen for community input to be useful? DataWorks - outside objective professional to evaluate the input;What needs to happen for community input to be useful? localize the plan at neighborhood level. What are the consequences of too much localization?;voting - more empowerment and encouragement for all and move that voice beyond voting;we want to see a plan that's more substantial;is there a real linkage of what residents say and what happens;concern that people affected most will not be aware of what's happening until it's too late;Engagement-learn from localized engagement to engage across the community;what specific spaces are there for resident agency? for the new plan? what are the ranges of possibilities;Active community outreach with community meetings in quadrants of the city;all people at the table at the beginning - outreach;Call a city official one should suffice. Department officials engaged not giving excuses. Calling simplified ;transparency, resources, immediate action needed;an ideal Durham: leadership and in professional settings held accountable for the all community they serve;an ideal Durham looks like all people at the table at the beginning-to outreach;Street team for EngageDurham, more intention toward broader communities;Outreach team had a little time to distribute info to neighborhoods;Why do we have elections every year? Can this be reduced to save money for other things? ;Want people involved;Creativity in policy making;an app where residents can report pedestrian and traffic issues;evidence based policy;Decisions and planning based on quantitative and qualitative data and includes peoples experiences and stories;Leadership design evidence-based policies (pollution, climate, carbon);Apply research to policies that reflect what's worked in other cities;Need to do demographic projections accurately and consistently;Time conflicted with domestic violence awareness event;An evaluation of the 2005 plan-because this was or wasn't in the plan, this is what happened;Share elements;word of mouth communication and flyers and social media-clear and simple communication. homeless pass out fliers for a meal;call a city official once should suffice. department officials engage, not giving excuses. community level vs. pot of money. simplify calling;getting knowledge out and people feeling safe to participate;communication and conversations between entities and resources-share information to change trust;who local government gives money to;trust;more conscience of unintended consequences;Incumbents reelected;Political organizations control votes; feels like a disservice;transparency, additional resources ($ at the issues), talk must result in action;if we're open for business, we need the staff to do this-not enough people to do the job we need to do (from residents);More equitable sharing of information to Hispanic and Latino populations;Equitable communities in terms of access to basic services ;A Durham where everyone feels empowered for their collective destinies;conversations around race, equity, and social mobility could help;Community centered ED more equity across communities and  less dichotomy.;Include safe spaces and better access to services and areas for immigrant community and black community;mixed neighborhoods where everyone can thrive, increasing equity;East Durham somewhat overlooked;There's a lot of talk about equity, inclusion, social justice. hard to see how that's being translated into action. I'm sure some groups have done it well, but it's not one size fits all. Let's make sure it's not just on paper, make sure it's integrated into work in a meaningful way-so it becomes the norm. We need institutional change;Every community thriving despite of zip code. Most activity in same areas - good, healthier food options, community food gardens in every community.;Ideal Durham is black and queer. Communities are thriving instead of being pushed out. Look at connections to history - black wall street. Nouveau riche. A city of equal opportunity across racial socio-economic backgrounds. ;Gentrification can be beneficial if everyone raises up together.;an ideal Durham: change some of the old ways of how government and business has worked that has hurt some communities;equitable development concerns. how to have some path to input. cynical, concerns, hopes;Equity Development; New development should be reflective of community; needs to focus on local free market;Increased effort towards inclusion and equal opportunity for housing and transportation;Disparities in infrastructure between different neighborhoods. ;environmental equity;Durham needs healthy facilities - open spaces, parks, swimming pools distributed equally;reparations for past historical injustices;Durham has money and need to be spreading resources to all people;communities where everyone thrives-this increases safety for all;Have an equitable community blueprint; natural systems, less plastic, decrease carbon footprint, less isolation;making transportation system fair and accessible for all especially low income population;give everybody a shot, a 100 year head start is not fair. need real transportation, etc. ;Example: Hope Valley Rd has sidewalks. Lynn, midway, pleasant, Angier used as cut-throughs, feels dangerous; want to walk safely. ;white wealth vs. black wealth-education on what is wealth and how to access;Close the wealth gap so everyone of every race and class can thrive;address inequity ;Inclusivity and Equity;Growth and opportunities for everyone;A community where everyone is thriving - a fuller equity rate;Having a community where everyone is thriving. Figure out a way for equity issues. There are great jobs that nobody knows about, can't get to them because there is no transit to get to them, that would help with  affordable housing. Would love a shared vision of everyone having a good job and housing.;In a nutshell, equality ;Want to see balance and equality;Healthy, educated, safe children. Public safety, Equity;Access to good healthcare, education, economic opportunity, and equitable communities;people are more willing to admit that racial inequality has reached a critical mass in Durham;Access for all people: resources, opportunities-economic development, land, affordable housing, homes;make sure that all the things we like about Durham is accessed and experienced by everyone: tree coverage and redlining;first priority-underserved parts of Durham;Racial equity lens - people of color - housing - healthy;how can we use a racial equity lens in this process?;Equal opportunities: health care, transportation, business;Not everyone has the same opportunities in Durham - some have not been given opportunities;Equal opportunities for all - transportation, housing, jobs, safety;historical reality of inequity;Inequalities in wealth, health, access, education, etc. ;Open equity conversations;Wealth isn't distributed;All accessible and equitable ;Would like an equitable Durham accessible to people from all areas of all the abilities and at all work shifts;Mix of cultures and income levels, reduce barriers;Expand economic equality.;Everything should be available to everybody.;racial equity to address racial inequity rather than economic development.;ideal Durham: where people of all location (urban, rural), races and ethnicities, income levels, ages and abilities can survive and thrive;all people can survive and thrive;equal access to services and opportunity for work;Be equitable.;What is the equity check on the new process and policy being developed? Someone to bring up issues when the arise.;Review housing code with an idea towards eliminating harm towards those with suppressed income.;Equity across zip codes;Thrive regardless of zip code.;racial equity lens-people of color: housing and health;coffee shop for mid-day-no big clubs or lounges. not like New Orleans French Quarter;one that attracts more specialty food places  and  restaurants;Infusion of specialty culinary Dames Chicken and Waffles. More exotic.;Community commercial near NCCU - restaurants, bars;Food. Farmer's markers Amazing restaurants. Chefs are mentors for upcoming chefs - welcoming community for food industry. ;Enjoy the city and hang out; a place to eat;Accessibility, healthy food;Food access: nutritious, healthy, affordable;More inexpensive grocery stores downtown and spread out throughout the city;Food access (healthy and affordable) and more community gardens;An ideal Durham would have more healthy food and fresh food. Bulldega opened that up downtown.;growing food in future on residential land and small animals;grow food on school grounds;mobilize fresh healthy organic food options;Food security with healthy affordable food stores and options;More community gardens;Access to grocery stores and doctors, especially for elderly;future Durham: housing close to groceries;Local food not national distribution for farmers ;food access-in next 10 years, Senior community will grow exponentially. Community is trying to make sure that bus routes frequent where seniors are;Planning for climate change and long-term planning for food security. grow food on school grounds, sustainability. creating systems where the community can feed themselves and each other;Evenly distributed grocery stores throughout Durham and connect residents with  quality transportation;More grocery options;more grocery stores;backyard chickens;Pretty happy as I am, but hope others with  less resources able to do the same things .  can walk to grocery store, connected bus routes, healthy food options;New grocery in ninth st is nice ;Want coordinated efforts churches schools, institutions on food, internet etc.;Ideal Durham where children aren't starving;There's no grocery stores: downtown is a food desert.;You could have a small Walmart  in the basement of an apartment.;There's a need for healthy grocery stores and mini-marts;Rolling Hills should be a great place for a grocery store, other local shops and stores;no more "food Deserts";East-Durham  and  Wake Forest is very desolate. Food deserts cause transportation;17% of population has "food insecurity" - not sure where their next meal will come from. Quality of food is part of it. Zoning could permit small grocery stores in a neighborhood. Before planning, neighborhoods were more diverse. Lets mm living upstairs mm the businesspeople trying to get back to this. vertical mixed use.;17% of people are food insecure. Zoning could make it so that small retail could be infilled into neighborhoods.;Taller and older structures could hold hydroponic food growth projects for food (NC State could help) especially if bldg. not suitable for habitation - fresh food for locals - decentralize food, help get rid of food deserts, jobs (coop system). ;Small stores, rather than all restaurants;Satellite Harris Teeters and/or Walmarts in community to fill void of mom and pop stores since they cannot easily compete then get services and needs met even though big business;More food options that are walkable- urban and suburban ;increased access to fresh affordable foods within a half mile;Want 100% of people to live within a half mile of fresh, affordable food;Food (Fruits and veggies) that are affordable and available. Grocery stores everywhere.;Food availability (healthy);food desserts-access to food and healthful foods;trader joes and walking to food;Dollar general to be zoned to be built at Oxford Manor. It is already a food desert and then we allowed easy access (EBT) to food filled with sodium and fat.;Projects needs healthy food;Encourage farmers market to grow and grow in all communities. Needs to be accessible for folks who really need it. Keep Seeds;Growing gardens! then help hunger;NCCU has poor food access;Shopping  and  groceries;Food deserts. ;Food deserts. Coop is expensive. ;It can be big, but can be a small community - easy to get to grocery store, etc.;Pocket gardens, pollinator gardens, local food markets, eliminate food deserts. ;Food accessibility. Not good food options for grocery stores, requires significant driving.;Ideal Durham - pop up markets, affordable, accessible, local and home delivery systems to benefit the farmers, imperfect produce market it a local resource. More community gardens.;Having availability and accessibility to things we need (super markets).;More farmers markets;grocery store downtown -it feels like a food dessert;serve locally grown food (funded by city and county) at schools and hospitals;ideal Durham: access to nutritious food sources;Concern with food deserts.;Clean food access  and  farm  and  gardens.;food affordability (healthy);Access to a supermarket (to and from the stores);What will be our way of measuring "success" of the comprehensive Plan? Will it get into the departments plan? How will these things be funded?;Transparency, additional resources ($  at the issues), talk must result in action;an ideal Durham would be: a model for other cities-how to approach and prioritize funds;Look at budget spent on new roads vs other forms of transportation. Would guess our spending on transit is bad.;tap in to funds that's available;Community level vs pot of money;Who local government gives money to;Gentrification is my issue. living in neighborhoods where there is a systemic problem. Fortunate to have found a mature area for my living that is striving for me - why not be more inclusive for all to strive such as I am. Maybe I'm fortunate but I want it to be strivable for all in Durham;What's on my mind is how we care for people, especially with gentrification. People being pushed aside or priced out. Slow it down or manage it better, have a place  for them in our community. Is there somewhere for them to live still in Durham-permanent place where they can afford to live. Don't make it seem impossible. ;being priced out of Durham;We moved to Durham because it was less expensive than other places; we recognize we are part of the gentrification wave. In Chapel Hill we lived so far out.;33,000 Black people have been pushed out of Durham already;Gentrification in the form of teardowns and replacements and an increase in density;Displacement of Blacks in downtown Durham; those who cannot afford it; displacement of those that cannot afford a majority of the housing here;We're in the middle of crisis of displacement for more vulnerable residents. People are being pushed out of city so fast, that the people who should be at the table won't be here to provide their input "people most effected, won't find out about this until too late";we are in the middle of a crisis of displacement and eviction, particularly for Black residents and low income residents (rising cost of living, property tax);gentrification=redlining is the same thing;Smaller homes used to be affordable but being demolished and new infill not affordable. Increase in homelessness because priced out. ;the predatory buying is ridiculous, people aren't getting what it's worth. predatory buyers like "we buy houses" is a problem. lot of vultures and buzzards coming into Durham. people should be able to stay in their houses;Gentrification--Losing a sense of community, "the neighborhood feeling" ex. Walltown;People have a right to be here;Segregation  and  gentrification then forms of housing and transportation and education of segregation issues;Some places too late for affordable housing - Southside $240k houses told 10 years ago told it would help with  house ownership - older residents helped to renovate but younger pushed out to Greensboro, Elon - aren't coming back - went to school here but can't can we afford to stay? Tree fell on house, renting in proximity to downtown. ;Advise and help homeowners to deal with gentrification and tax increase to keep them in their homes;pushing people out in to county that need transportation;prevent gentrification through zoning activity-or study as a part of the comprehensive plan update;Worry for Gentrification but move to evidence based policy and not fear based.;Moderate income residents are moving due to affordability issues;Where people have invested in these communities - keep those - people are always sending us letters wanting to purchase our home;people will be displaced before the building is done;Ideal Durham wouldn't price people out;NCCU = > want transportation and easy access to grocery store and food (affordable) = > tension between NCCU growth and Fayetteville Roxboro St (gentrification?) what neighborhoods want;Enterprise St area are too expensive: pressures to sell;Residential impacts and gentrification;Gentrification: outsiders buying land to accumulate wealth and keep locals from accumulating wealth. Differing types of gentrification based on area of Durham County;Housing Bond Funds need to address Displacement, especially with  Seniors who are not reassured by new promises of new homes; the community needs to help;Durham was community-oriented and residents can see that it is different now - people don't talk to their neighbors, due to income inequality; people just waiting to see who will be displaced next;Lived in the same neighborhood in (Emory Woods) for a long time and now it's all white people moving in; neighborhoods in South Side are so sought after;Gentrification - people can't afford their homes because of positive growth - the state influences this tax growth;Gentrification - can't afford to pay property taxes - options for tax relief.;Activity Gentrification of it added some confusion;gentrification;loss of what makes Durham Durham. questioning why we have to grow. like suburban and urban feel. concerned about losing diversity. low income people are getting pushed out. can't we slow growth?;some affordable housing no longer affordable. seniors have no choice but to sell because of gentrification . ex) Walltown;a lot of deferred maintenance on homes, younger couples bidding on houses against their age group and developers. will change the character of older neighborhoods;gentrification: can be everybody and improve but keep locals;gentrification: impacts buying decisions;gentrification: how do we define it;gentrification: we're all culprits, but it is unavoidable;gentrification: different in every neighborhood;gentrification: respectful way to improve;gentrification: we need balance and mixed-income living;gentrification: manifestation of capitalism;gentrification: manifestation of housing as a spectrum(starter, upgrade, etc.);gentrification: displacement of renters;gentrification: important if it is caused by local vs. non-local(developer or owner);gentrification: rent control and capping and incremental;gentrification: better enforcement efforts and work around law;gentrification: accountability of slum-lords and follow-up on changes;gentrification: across housing spectrum;gentrification: tighten regulations!;gentrification: more staff for enforcement, or up penalty!;Gentrification ;White-washing of Durham (chains, luxury housing, POC pushed out);Feeling of hostility toward gentrification;Price appreciation is leading to segregation;Balancing gentrification.;Gentrification and housing prices. ;Rising property values and gentrification. Very difficult problem. ;City services which could lead to gentrification. At city near 147 and Chapel Hill as an example.;Green gentrification is an issue (Beltline). Be very cognizant of it, this could happen. Look at other cities' experiences.;future Durham: people who have always lived in Durham can keep on living here;Redlining maps of Durham predict who will be pushed out next (gentrification?);"we buy home signs"-educate residents on predatory buying and lending and developers;The people who have been here for years, are not priced out of Durham.;what can we do now? speed of displacement how does this fit into the plan;Development without displacement--protect and plan for different comm.;Concerned about developer quality and standards; City demands quality;segregation gentrification-forms of housing and transportation and education of segregation issue;keep neighborhoods stable-be able to keep living and stay where they are;Morgan creek park doesn't use because told poisonous snails. Share info about how to avoid things like that ;Environment in the urban tier, they deserve decent air quality too. ;Green spaces more accessible to more neighborhoods. Generally seems less in low-income;more green spaces and greenways; miniature parks and large parks; improve equity in park maintenance, access to green spaces;Greenways ;More greenways creating economic centers with neighborhoods (ATT, Ellerbe Creek);green spaces, greenways, bike lanes are prioritized;Preserve greenspace within development;opens spaces - preserving them is very important. Ellerbe creek Watershed Association balancing that with development, redevelopment and preserve open space. Natural space (not golf course) more places like Eno River State Park;Research Triangle Park originally required 20% land left as wild and non-developer. ;No green space in a community = pay higher AC, more asthma, poorer communities;20 years what do we look like? vegetation everywhere possible-all along buildings and "white space";Parks, side walks, contiguous network of infrastructure greenspace access  and  tree removal rate  and  more regulation on developers re: trees.;How important are parking lots to Durham? Parking lots take away from public or green space and take up a lot of building sites if connected to building - not a good thing, come up with new ideas for how to deal with  huge # of cars  and  parking;Trails and Parks--allow after dark hours;Greenway systems connect especially regionally - quality of life;what I like about Durham: access to green space (can only access if you have a car-bad thing), parks, people;Trees make better communities and not lose the greenspace that we have. ;Trees in East Durham: visual greenery and aesthetic;I really like all the big trees we have and tree replanting efforts. We have pockets of green space in urban areas I really enjoy.;Agree with above. Make parks, walkways continuous - connect different areas that may be disconnected. Preserve green space. Many trees coming down. Could be more regulation of developers - more restrictive in what they can cut and what they must plant. Make community more bird-friendly . Some birds disappearing. ;Start permitting change so it protects green space, mature trees, reduce impervious surfaces. Believes the city is backing down on the permitting process. Fears we are losing space. Ad hoc approach - make road one way. Combined and  scooter bike lane, restripe, etc.;Protect greenspace in the sense we have more parks in neighborhoods and in the city;Green Tree and Spaces ;Keep the pockets of green space. ;Parks ;more green and trees;tree cover and green space;urban ag!;trees;Urban agriculture  and  creative use of urban green space should be encouraged;tree-lined streets and community gardens;Kids and grandkids live with Durham need open space reduce emissions;Access to greenspace - Eno State Park;Durham tree trimming crew very active lately - taking out old  and  massive trees .  trees planted shallowly .  need to be replaced.;Keep our green spaces for environmental impacts and wildlife;Green spaces, trails;Trees- use local and native trees;honoring and respecting native plants and species ;Green corridors like the one just north of downtown more common and fostered;Green! .  parks or roofs!;Maintain and expand green spaces (including downtown);Trees yay!;Plant correct trees ;Green space;Trees!;More parks and green spaces.;What I like about Durham:;Forest and countryside are close by;Add public green space.;More pocket parks.;Keep tree canopy.;Keep trees in neighborhoods.;Greenspace downtown. There are no greenspace downtown. We want that. A little bit but we want more. Many benefits of greenspace.;Parks needed. Pocket parks.;Tree canopy. Willow, oaks are aging out. Expand distribution within neighborhoods. Psychological and safety benefits of trees. ;Public green spaces that's usable. We have parks but not in good condition. ;Equal open space should be added when there is new development. Development should not be able to take down all of the trees.;Reasonable growth, wildlife corridors, Jordan and Falls lakes protected.;Should have required open space in new development.;Housing development. Clear cutting of forests for townhouses and apartments. Preserve more trees and do more responsible development. ;Need tree canopy re: heat island , flooding, think about these things together.  ;Green space.;Trails - maintenance and upkeep - connect neighborhoods greenspace needed with more development occurring. Preservation of existing. People need places to gather.;future Durham: trees, plants, green space;future Durham: green space, trees in public spaces;future Durham: a  lot of greenspace;future Durham: required open space for all new construction;preserve awesome farmland in North Durham-don't make it like North Raleigh;Green roofs on parking garages.;More green space, open areas, public gardens;Wildlife areas for redevelopment;More sidewalks, wants to see parks, greenspaces for all kids, more equitability;Retain community gardens, expand thru DPR.;More open spaces budget more for.;Green space  and  parks. Increase biodiversity.;Increase greenspace required by new development, river corridors.;A lot more greenways, trees and ways to walk through. ;Bothered by developments taking down all the trees and planting baby trees to compensate.;Encourage gardens.;Living close to downtown - need green space so with higher density have somewhere to go besides café.;Parks Bond referendum - Durham central Park Is center of activity - buy land for green space before 40 years ago cannot live there now.;Green space ;Getting rid of trees has an affect on people and art.;Making sure there is green space and tree cover as we continue to build. Access to shade and greenery.;Greenways  and  greenspace ;Community garden = greenspace (double benefit pride).;More green spaces connected by greenways and bike trails, tying into a bike network throughout the city.;The Triangle is cross-commuting. Needs to be more robust for people to use it. In between areas are sought after for that reason. example: Morrisville has affordable homes, it fuels the sprawl;Consider adverse effects on the bird population as the city grows;Where we bought our house and I can see that developing-but we didn't want to see that pushing people out. Back then, at Roxboro and Club there were restaurants and Walmart. It's more abandoned now. Now some fast food chains;Can't keep putting stuff on top of stuff - it's congested;change in demographics;We should be concerned about sprawl-focus on places that can handle more development because of existing infrastructure and not contribute to a car oriented culture;development that keeps going out, low density=sprawl. offices, separate from residential -if more mixed use was put in, it would cut trees, but it would be worth it;Dense development--streetscapes, sidewalks;I like the density; but I feel frustrated with the density being focused on luxury. Would like to see density downtown NOT focused on luxury.;Some of the city - so much good change - nice to have so much activity starting to lose some of the gritty character. ;Build a city that accommodates growth; without losing Durham's identity;Make UDO and permitting more simple and understandable. Streamline Process;Too much development to soon, lots of apartments, demolishing old buildings that last longer. ;sustain growth through affordable, compact neighborhoods. development branches out. infrastructure gets the care and attention that it needs (e.g.. schools);Builders should have to pay for the building subsidies;Require builders to contribute funds designed to help people who won't live in those buildings;when new developments happen, make sure there's money given to community;We won't be getting any more land - people looking for land more than a house. Putting houses wherever they can find a spot;I have trouble with the new development. Good that it's dense, but quality not as good as it could be. Seems a little cookie cutter;saving some of the trees for the developments;Single family renovations creeks and runoff - Taylor and Guthrie;I think we're mostly already ideal. The growth is a good problem. How do we actualize the good planning that's already occurred? I was surprised at our good tree cover and greenway.;Developers clear cut and build -- Urban Forestry control of development;Growth should be respectful of environment then awareness of resources before development planned. Falls Lake, streams, low spots that flood. building very tall buildings near resources could cause other issues;lack of environmental protections against development;environmental study-streams and development;Not doing a great job preserving trees - 200 house dev add a community park;If development has to happen, it should maintain the style, community character and property values of existing neighborhoods;The house should reflect the community it's in. $30k house should not be beside $1.2 million house. Who are you attracting to that area? The people who did live there, where are they going to go? $50k house won't get you anything here now. If a contractor builds an expensive house, then I can't live in that neighborhood anymore. Ideally it would be nice to have mixed income-but is it possible?;Include Northern Durham in growth and development ;increasing population is a challenge-transportation needs to accommodate that;Is fast better, or should we slow down to address quality?;Durham is too developer friendly;If a development is coming in - traffic should not cut through a community creating a lot of through traffic;Is Durham looking into development around Transit Rapid stops?;More infill development and less car-focused development at the edges.;Development standards for new development in existing neighborhoods;Move growth to outer areas of city -not allow more infill in older neighborhoods. ;Support residential  and  commercial for RTP.;Smart growth - where to strategically expand areas to promote growth that builds economic strength and prosperity.;Change zoning;More meeting space and hotel rooms;More high rise structures;Build out from city center;Not thinking holistically and need to think strategically.;Need a central focus and not be reactionary.;S Alston is planned as a middle class area per 2005 plan;homes being taken in name of growth;Use decrepit or demolished buildings for future developed. Not established neighborhoods.;Support grassroots and incremental change;Develop people, not areas;develop on land where they've already demolished buildings;I wonder how zoning and plan can support both old and new - change  doesn’t concern me, but it should have boundaries;Retain small  and  mid-size character as we grow. The growth model shouldn't be only tall buildings, particularly near downtown  and  mixed use areas. Density isn't bad per se.;New construction;New housing construction;Commerce diving - North Durham  and  Northgate - South square Mall;Commerce - Northgate bloat and stone;Want to be more dense, more mixed, more categories. Not specialized, sprawled;I really like Durham, only been here 5 years. Don't want things to change too much.;Commerce - Spans back 14 years, a yr+, worry about lower income parts of Durham, Northgate, went thru there for the first time in a while. Man. Sears is gone, just vacant stores on the opposite end you have Southpoint. You wonder why is that. Up Roxboro, Trosa, Burlington Coat Factory. A shoe store I used to go to - out of business. With all that's going on downtown, South Durham, are we squeezing out the northern, more city areas?;Too many self-storage facilities in one many place.;Larger lots would be ideal, more places on Perkins;More places;Develop off of Page Rd;Poor road network near Page Rd. too much development;Wants comp plan that allows us to grow, maintains diversity, and for people to stay where they live.;Line between rural and downtown Durham ;concerns about development going N and E;At the end of Davis Drive @ Publics, they're functional:  they work.;Areas in Morrisville: they work.;Planning: need to stretch RTP toward Highway 55 and Highway 54.;"That monstrosity they're building where South Square: think of all that traffic dumping onto 15/501.";"Actually I kind of like that." *pointing to above comment*;I'm not sure why we're creating more commercial space.;What the city has done has created more sprawl to Mebane, to Sanford. Creating longer commutes, more pollution. Rocky MT-Wilson is now a bedroom community of Raleigh.;Proximity to RTP and growth there has an effect;restriction on what's being built;Need for intentional growth to be able to help everyone - does not happen on its own;Convert places where there is already development;South Point original intention isn't anything what it is today;Looking at existing commercial nodes and using the Comp Plan to provide "carrots and treats" for positive growth in economy, environmental, transportation.;comp plan - look at existing nodes - a lot could be redeveloped. Encourage development around those.;Northgate - a great opportunity to redevelop;multi center - not putting everything downtown.;Spend more time talking about suburban tier;Replicate what people love about 9th Street;Use already failed stores instead of building other places;Theme: seeing change;Redevelopment;Large planned development. Pre and post WWII;Police station - what to do with it. 1957 Building. The rest of the building needs work;Durham is desirable, so that may make it easier to ask for developers.;Chatham County keeps growing;We need to control growth in North Durham County.;need to address water quality with Chatham County growth;Consider and define development - preserve blue ways  and  greenways; build more along ridgelines;No more "pickle buildings" .  (15/501) with zero lived-in city around;Allowing more development in the rural areas of the county (more floors for footprint?);Gateway  and  sprawl out throughout;have 9th St. type Avenue in North and East Durham;Expand how many miles or blocks away from a proposed project must be notified;Planning commission not following the current comprehensive plan;an ideal Durham: exceptional growth in next 30 years. growth is sustainable. affordability and sustainability;revitalization of previous factory buildings;there are policies that fuel growth. city government is pro growth. recent policies driven by development community. not listening to disenfranchised;can we stem outside growth? can we choose how we grow-up and out, higher density. growing incredibly fast. pushing out people and businesses that grew up here;onerous development process-expedite;residential areas throughout Durham City and Durham County are as important as downtown and have important issues about growth that need to be heard and addressed;annexation of rural areas is for a tax base but then not coming back to community;the 2005 plan created these scenarios (keeping us in here);Stop allowing all clear cut development;Increasing participatory structures around -policing, - budgeting, -housing development authority, - what concessions are made to outside development, - zoning, - that prioritize the voices of disinvested communities;Bring development to all areas of the County;Potential development of Northgate Mall;Neighborhood are not told about new development and when find out they not know who to talk to for information or to fight against things. ;Stop mini annexation - define borders of City or annex the entire county. Jurisdictional difference - confusing and unfair.;Should be a mechanism to have exceptions to the requirements of the UDO if hashed out with developers and neighborhood;Considering development holistically vs project by project;Higher income residents have greater excess income than existing residents then must make intentional decisions to maintain character and diversity - if we lose character why come here since we are no longer unique;Junction Road Industrial Park;Does growth negate the diversity that makes us desirable;The need for updated zoning regulations and educations of city council members about zoning.;We need well planned and managed growth.;What I like about Durham:;It's small (or used to be);Small town feel retained.;Pockets of development surrounding neighborhoods.;Rationale planning and controlled.;What I don't like: Rampant, patch work uncontrolled development.;What I don't like: clear cutting during development.;May need taller buildings. More than 4 stories.;Updated zoning. Looking at density calculations - can use.;Impact of small lot - building on storm water regional.;EHC should have come after comp plan.;Keep focused areas of development. ;Redevelop existing places like strip malls and car dealerships to protect undeveloped land.;Incentivize redevelopment.;Like it is neighborhoods commercial schools.;A vibrant downtown with architecturally interesting buildings. With enough population to support;Previous comp plan drew circles around downtown regardless of whether development types fit the neighborhood character;Build on already vacant land;Too much focus on growth - not enough on current residents;Fayette Place could be converted;redevelop derelict spaces first before cutting down another tree;area between downtown and Duke following right pattern;Durham is what Austin was 10 years ago;Brier Creek (low density per SF) is starting to become North Raleigh-short sighted;concern about lack of connectivity and island neighborhoods;liberty warehouse is dirty (the process);Durham is in the right direction for growth;more neighborhood commercial districts that are distinct and not downtown;no more sprawling strip malls;embrace node growth patterns across community;more cool neighborhood pockets;pattern is not for millennials to go live in suburbs-access to food, bus, entertainment key;we see less of the potential and more of a direction-potential is diminishing just because its becoming;residential development that follows unique, eclectic, and artsy patterns instead of cookie cutter;Require trade off  and  percentage of housing  and  fee in lieu to provide affordable housing .;Have a proactive plan regarding growth that Durham desires - what infrastructure will support.;Downtown growth management character;Liberal policies - most developer friendly in the triangle. Removed barriers to build;City pretty good about checking in project impacts but need to ask questions about how impact before allowing all projects;promote hubs and development outside of downtown;Balance between development;Development connected to what happens in that space once its built;Density: fit in as many people as possible;Clustering;What's the CENTER OF GRAVITY?;Scale;I love the size of Durham, though it will grow;(in response to above) but how can you have a plan that doesn't account for population growth?;Unsure where Durham is with regards to Accessibility;Health, food to lower adverse childhood experiences. Violence in Durham. Going hungry. Healthy mothers and healthy teenagers;counseling should be done by black folks, understanding their plights;City of Health ; we live in a city of medicine ; we need to be a city of health. ;Healthy neighborhoods for everybody;We can live in smaller spaces. Just need healthy lifestyles too ;Health impact considered in all policies;Prevent crime with health. Clean air exercise with parks and sidewalks ; more daycare. ;access to healthcare and quality education;Access - more money going to this service; hard to get approved; free part is for medical .  long waits - not worth it; expand this service - way to make it free or affordable; very hard to understand service; can only use medical or personal use, not both;balanced in health, economics , etc., etc.;mental health care options  and  housing;healthy residents ;Community Health Centers that are accessible should be a focus of the plan; have counselors available @ those locations;Improve access and experience going to Duke med .  distribute facilities to the community;Durham needs to become age friendly to influence health, transportation, community -U.A. is  struggling to get patients into the Hospital because;Mental Health Issues- kids at schools being bullied ;What outreach is there for kids and people stress and home problems;mental health awareness and programming;Housing built before 1978 - certified workers. Contractors are not certified to do them and not in compliance. Lead based paint exposure then crime and dropouts;more health and wellness resource staff are needed for homeless people. provide resources to people that need them;What community resources are there for people with mental health?;Trauma - support fam. living with trauma ;Mental health - visible and invisible. Ex. organizations for mental health are overburdened, long waitlist;Mental health being accessible;Quality of life issues;Healthier for everyone.;Healthier - walkable food deserts, safe neighborhoods, child cover.;Strive to have all citizens be healthy and happy.;Aiding public safety and economy of care; makes a big difference for people.;Ideal Durham would have programs around mental health, folks aren't recognized until after a crime has happened.;Need to evaluate people (Nashville) on site for mental health diversion.;Ideal Durham - Where people of all location (urban, rural), races and ethnicities, income levels, ages and abilities can survive and thrive.;future Durham: healthy, happy people;it's a healthy and safe city now (compared to 2012);We want a healthy, competent, growing people. Not economic planning, but instead, a focus on growing people.;Wellness in Bull City ;Mental accessibility;More widely distribute health centers ;Involve bike - more community focus - how would a community health center have more quality? Require a center to host weekend care - urgent care, dialysis, etc. Talk to (?) providers;not being pushed out of redlined areas. DataWorks has already said 3,000 blacks have been pushed out;Hayti destroyed by 147;Promises that were never fixed--infrastructure in the 70's;How to push issues to the public? Have more Planning officials involved in the public. 147 is a great example of why people don't trust planning. Public housing has a bad name but it shouldn't be labeled so with good planning. ;Remove 147 through downtown;Doesn't want to change: Historic preservation. Affordability. Road system is pretty good. Durham has multiple routes;architecture: all old look of Durham's history buildings;honoring our history and creating diverse spaces;it's all part of what Durham was (architecture, local businesses and restaurants);I would like Durham's history to be preserved - the buildings and stories. We need opportunities for new and old people to mixed and pass on the special nature of Durham and it's history. The new people need to learn it from old - through mixed income.;Character - not wanting to lose Durham. How cool it is. Architecture, repurposed warehouses, Black Wall Street, farm to fork, foodie, not losing what people consider the cool part of the Triangle.;More specialized area for historic district;Preserve heritage including buildings downtown and older neighborhoods ;Preservation of Historical areas;historic preservation: leave some provisions for preserving and protecting significant historical sites and housing areas-streets, blocks, etc. ;Southside apartments and the history of the area;I would like to see more emphasis placed on understanding the history of Durham and Durham's heritage. Welcome package to the city - here the city - welcome that addresses an overview of the richness of Durham. Invite them to contribute to the next 150 years of Durham. Overview of transit, etc. There is a deep history not just the Dukes; not just the white and black - good and bad; making the focus on development to address including underserved minorities. requiring that be a high priority.;DPS should recruit teachers from within our community with local expertise-give our students pride in our and its history;Very concerned about Durham being able to retain historic structures (chapter 5 in the Comp Plan not being paid attention to). NPO has not been elevated. ;Historic neighborhoods not paid attention to. NC session law. ;Rectify historic racism;don't charge people to learn their own history: teach our history to our children;Lakewood public art example combining old with new;More community and family I like the history - that's all going out the window now;honor history and new together;preserve history alongside progression of city;One of my concerns: with this growth I don't feel like there's a good mix of history with progression - we'll never see those old unique types of buildings again;Durham needs to grow carefully. Historic buildings and character are important to community identity, for example Brightleaf, the loop, warehouses, historic neighborhoods like Trinity Park. Modern buildings often cause loss of authentic character and drive up the cost of housing.;Former tobacco industry - liggett and myers, Chesterfield;Black History , civil rights and Duke;Art  and  History  and  Community - keep murals and more color - more visible signs of history (more than just signs) - a better sense of community and  less isolation - more "third" spaces that aren't Starbucks ;The history - how can we honor and redress this ;Historic preservation;Need to maintain character of Durham and history;Durham has history of African Americans thriving. Strong voices, have history of strong advocacy groups- way to ensuring overall prosperity. Important institutions supporting your population, NC Mutual, Mechanics, Farmers;What keep about Durham? Preserve historic and industrial buildings and houses. Durham was an industrial city; preserving it is important. Help tourism;Preserve historic parts of Durham;Black and Latino history;rich history draws people here-celebrating these stories(Black Wall St. etc.);honor history, arts, diverse spaces;It's important to preserve history;Uneven ground 150 year celebrations--why things are like they are.;Preserving some of old architecture.;Recognizes and protects history. Downtown and outer ring. Preserve agricultural history like Pauli Murray's house. Gives the City its soul. Leveraging history and stories as valuable.;Architectural old look of D's history buildings.;number of teardowns in East Durham is alarming-should depend on a plethora of factors, utilize what we can and honor when we need to teardown;pedestrian interaction with Durham's history-make it more visible, make it more interactive, the hub downtown (more);Connect our local history to what is happening today. Make sure young residents how lead in the future know where we came from  and  where going.;Bridge history to future.;Planning is not  innocent;Access to resource education, services should be provided for homeless, like financial literacy, teaching them;I know there are homeless shelters, how can I help pushed out people have a place to stay?;Affordable housing is on the forefront, but addressing the homeless aspect; tiny homes should be considered but it is understand that this is not the complete answer. potential adding stuff to backyards, being mindful not to steer away from segregating individuals.;Homeless using parks to sleep;An ideal Durham is a place where no one is living under highways: housing for most vulnerable residents. no one living outdoors, under bridges;Housing for homeless residents.;Making sure no one was homeless in Durham would be amazing. Hope housing bond can help;help the invisible homeless;49 year residents parked and walked around downtown to survey all the changes - encountered a homeless resident, concern about panhandling and displacement;I've heard rumors about urban ministry or bus station moving out of downtown because of people being uncomfortable about homeless people being nearby;I encountered some homeless people downtown and I wasn't offended, but other people are. I worry about them being displaced.;one with less persons begging or having to beg for money downtown;Homeless;Low income housing - people who are homeless. I feel really bad, especially in winter, cold, snowing.  Want provide options for people who don't have. Downtown I see a lot of people, not sure if they are homeless. Need to provide shelter.;Evictions and homelessness are a problem, people being priced out of their homes;Homelessness .  students moving from shelters: want to tackle this issue in comp plan .  impacts on kids; summer food programs; food during winter;no panhandling, deal with homelessness;Our homeless population seems very high - find ways to help;Homeless population - find ways to help;Hopeful that affordable housing plan will reduce  and  eliminate homelessness;More drug rehabilitation programs and more homeless shelters;Woman sleeping in car with  kids .  only 30 beds in town for homeless?;20 years-what do we look like? homeless shelters: many access points have been closed, multiple locations around the area with comprehensive services, home first model: give people homes right away;Homelessness: in addition to the people living underneath bridges along 147 and the woods along 15-501, there are the invisible homeless. ;Open up more clean, suitable beds at all homeless shelters for free, especially pregnant women and working adults;We are seeing an increase in homelessness in our community;Homeless pass out fliers for a meal;Opportunities for homeless community;that we would not allow living on the street as an option;No more people living under bridges and panhandling;Homelessness is not acceptable - "this is not the Durham where I grew up";With this comprehensive plans we have to address what's keeping our current system of housing impacted. What aspects of this community needs are needed.  Affordable technology to internet and high speed data. Right to access technology such as you do to utility services helps to drive success.;information on how to get the most out of our properties;Affordable housing;Concerned about affordable housing;Affordable housing: Downtown Durham apartments look nice, but the rent is ridiculous. There should be affordable spots too;I heard they'll turn DHA properties into mixed income developments, and turn those properties into parking lots in 20 years;Work force housing: having housing and programs for the working class. working class has to travel far, many outside of the county;affordable housing-what can the city do and what can't the city do with these funds and programs? does the affordable housing help those in need or is it supporting a different audience, more evidence in how these approaches are made and evaluations afterward, data can say public engagement data;regulated affordable housing, more, so developers can't do whatever, located near things like grocery stores, pharmacy, home depot, mixed use developments, allowable use in the plan would allow to build things other than homes;affordable rental housing;Research and Develop sustainable tiny house communities that will help transitioning fragile populations to become stabilized including working adults whose income is not high enough to afford the "affordable" housing Durham is currently offering;Due to the fact that there is a current affordable housing crisis in Durham, many under age 40 are moving out of the city-many of whom have children-have you considered just like in that Minneapolis plan how the loss of student populations affect the local school system with less children and less dollars per pupil from the State for education? At the same time there is a teacher shortage and you can hardly get qualified teachers to live here in Durham because it is NOT affordable for single people either! I hear a lot of new teachers say they would not live in Durham due to the crime, so many of my colleagues live in Orange, Alamance, and Wake County. So you have a lot of people who work in Durham but do not support the property taxes in Durham, which leaves a burden for the ones who do. ;McDougald and Hoover, Affordable Housing Bond: Poverty is being concentrated and that aspect is overtaking all others, safety and gun control, narrative of areas is stigmatic, mixed-income redevelopments will bring public and private partnerships that will magically evolve into a spillover affects;can't afford to rent in Durham-at any income levels;more incentives for affordable housing for developers;affordable housing but also opportunities to create wealth;We bought our homes at an earlier age and are now in our 60's; cannot afford to live in house we have maintained for 25 years;Continued push for affordable housing;provide attractive packages to set aside housing and provide support to the areas in Durham that have less;Housing options - affordable;Housing - available to everyone - low income;housing affordable;separate type of opportunity for low income resources. opportunity to own property;housing options-affordable;housing-available to everyone, low income;Affordable housing should be a requirement - at least 10% ;Drastically improving the quality and amount of affordable housing that is 100% carbon neutral and specifically providing subsidies for housing near DT for youth from Durham;All housing development in urban core requirement to set aside affordable units;Affordable Housing;High-rise with moderate price;Improving housing for low income people;Affordable housing issue;Affordable housing important to help with  things;ideal Durham: affordable rent, room for people who are here and people to come in;take initiative to affordable housing;Affordable housing;Affordable housing.;Quality affordable housing, not just concentrated in one areas, smaller community-based housing;no more luxury apartments for Duke students-affordable mixed income and public housing;More affordable for single mothers in East Durham. 30-40% single mothers, no rent control so usually cannot afford rents, work and tired so hard to take care of children - help them live better;Homebuyer and other wealth building options for people with lower incomes - 40% AMI and below;It's expensive to be a homeowner. Maybe that's a wise choice to be a renter;Affordable housing--how will it resolve itself with so many people moving here?;Homes in which they are owned but the owner cannot afford maintenance;Rents have gone up steeply, school demographics have changed because people have been pushed out by costs;Affordable housing and also housing for seniors;concerns: housing cost, tax increases;community homes;Public Housing near my place and crime ;homeownership for Black and African-American people;housing for a range of incomes and types;housing options for all income levels;A good mix of expensive and affordable houses, by cost. Ideally if you want to move to Durham, you can afford to live in Durham. Don't isolate it to just people who make 6 figures. Make it nice and affordable to live;Affordable housing getting pushed out of the downtown. Don't let development hurt the diversity of Durham.;In neighborhood there is conversation regarding property values being reduced based on the additions of affordable housing. Accessible dwellings; tiny housing is very energy efficiency; building an affordable housing complex is not as flexible of a solution because it seems to isolate certain types of people. Being mindful to have housing plans to be inclusive of all types of housing;Diverse housing choices: apartments, ADUs, dispersed affordable and mixed-income developments;A diverse community with affordable housing for everybody - racially, economically, educationally;Affordable housing--a place where you can live and work in the Downtown and Downtown adjacent area without driving or riding the bus;More housing in triplex and quadplex ;Not having big dev that's all the same - want a mix of housing types within each community - mom would live in a duplex. I could be with kids in a single family home;Integrated affordable housing; expanding housing choices and opportunities;Energy-efficient homes and rental properties;Ideal Durham: Housing options for all: suitable for families, multigenerational or unconventional families, cooperative living;Eliminate the waiting list for current housing units for families, especially those with children and pregnant women;an ideal Durham: Immigrants and refugees have housing and are taken care of, not grouped by SES in neighborhoods;Engage socially responsible landlords-non and selective housing;Housing for everyone and moving people out of poverty;eviction diversion;housing bond-innovation, eviction diversion;housing (evictions);no more evictions, universal right to ;no more evictions, universal right to counsel, affordable housing for all;Stop evictions (filings) resources;Affordable housing downtown. Food desert downtown hard to find affordable.;reverse evictions by providing emergency financial support for at lease 3 months to low income families and adults, especially those with children;Housing: Fayetteville street apartments were bulldozed so many years ago and that affordable housing was never replaced. Where is the money from that? ;DHA has pushed families out, does not do housing inspections.;Southside was supposed to be multi-income but is not.;Rent control;100% green affordable housing stock;houses built before 1978-certified workers, contractors are not certified to do them and note in compliance. lead based paint exposure-crime and dropout rates;housing-work with absentee landlords to make healthy;Housing - people must have home ownership to give people power;Housing bond doesn't help the people it needs to-how long does it take to help those under the bridges to get the $95 million to them? People are being evicted -not children. take care of our people. ;Eviction diversion programs, homeless entry programs, centralized intake;Place where everyone has a place to live. Homeless residents don't have enough support. ;Bond only about 1/2 $ needed to solve issue;Money set aside to repair and restore homes - make sure housing bond works for all;For all property to be occupied;Housing issue is priority with trying to accommodate influx of people - whatever land we have this is it;Regulation of short term rental i.e. (licensing, inspections);teach folks how to truly value their property, to avoid predatory buyers. make sure people are working together. create good practice for renting. teach folks what to do with it. ;Public housing to some sort of transitional housing program for well and able bodies individuals;Public housing change into "real" neighborhood;Tiny homes on city and CO land for transition from prison and homelessness;revaluation of houses negatively impacted poor neighborhoods more than rich neighborhoods;Lots of renters in Durham; difference between local landlords and large companies. ;City rules around renters' rights;City rules around renters rights ;Housing - mix is good - people chose because of "good" schools but maybe think about renters;Housing-landlord (absentee), older, health environmental;Incentive for 1st time homeowners;Public housing transition to ownership;What incentives can we provide to residents of Oxford Manor to come 1st time homebuyers? ;Every parent has safe and affordable housing;All people would have safe and adequate housing;in an ideal Durham: Durham prioritizes working folks, families, those more vulnerable through affordable housing and education;Wants housing to remain affordable so can stay until die - senior stay put program - small stores etc. in community so can stay there as age. ;Ideal Durham: Housing options for all: address homelessness through system of care (building partnerships with service organizations);that temporary housing is truly temporary;find more examples of tiny house communities that offer amenities and affordability;tiny house village example included in notes: much more affordable model of "development" for average pay Durham residents;Increase supply of housing; people not cars, connect housing and transit; political courage;2030 visions: affordable housing and free transportation for everyone;Affordable housing that is actually near a bus route; how do we keep those things affordable?;Special programs to keep vulnerable populations and their homes;creeks and runoff, single family house renovations-Taylor and Guthrie;additional options for low income housing and jobs;Need more housing to keep up with jobs;Special subsidized housing for youth especially around downtown;Concerned about developers building large, expensive houses - how can we and the city stop that.;Use zoning to limit the size of houses, especially near small houses.;There's a political will in Durham for housing for inclusionary zoning.;People buying houses to become Airbnb's. Durham is regulated.;More tiny houses - tiny house village as a development scheme. ;habitable homes;more affordable housing that is organic;Bond should have followed the new comp plan will Durham;bond won't benefit work class, or at least not fast (2024 delivery); won't help poor people;EHC changes are not addressing Alt.;Getting rid of SF zoning, but only in the urban tier;Suburbs turning to townhouses;Hold off on Low-Income Affordable Housing until Comprehensive Plan is done (cart before horse);Look at combining employers providing housing or subsidized housing for employers.;There are plans in the comprehensive plan that we don't know about that will affect our houses. ;We were floored Central is taking our house.;the housing bond should have been done after the comprehensive plan;Affordable housing bond: worry it won't fix things for working class people;rent is rising too fast;they're rezoning to get rid of single family neighborhoods - this doesn't fix the highest cost problem;NC Central has a plan that will take away our housing in the next 10 years;Affordable housing near jobs and transit;one where rental values and housing costs decrease or don't increase with newer housing development;low income house;Affordable mix;Integrated - economically. Our neighborhood 20 years ago when we moved in was integrated, now is not. We need large homes, small homes, duplexes.;I'm born and raised in Durham, came back after college, apartment was affordable. Came back 5 years later after grad school, was not able to find same price. Would be ideal for housing not to be a burden for low to mid income, younger persons, older persons to live without it being so stressful;More low income housing  too many displaced people;Building 1 dev. can exclude single mothers and POC; no more homogenous developments;Want mix of housing types (apartments, townhomes, affordability);Affordable housing density bonus doesn’t work;Ideal make it easy to put in housing smaller than 300 feet., manufactured small units I nothing *illegible* > European Park and ride;Police station redevelopment- turn into dormitory style living ;Build but not at the expense of people that live here (housing affordability);quality, stable housing ;community of tiny homes;You look at the young people coming out of school and they need place to live.;Problems with Tiny Houses: it would increase the tax valuation.;Tiny Housing: communities, for homeless vets.;More and different kinds of affordable housing would be good. You need a variety;The best affordable housing, is small, single lot, single story homes.;It's not affordable, its subsidized housing.;Small units, not fancy, but affordable. You can personalize it. And then you bring back the tradesman.;Affordable housing (A.H.): It's not affordable. A don't want to pay for. Duke adjunct professors to have a cute place to live. Make it for the poor.;The school teachers can't afford to live near their schools.;Hope 6 project benefitted the community; they have a huge national-night out- it's a mixed-use community;Denver had consultants help with affordable Housing to make assistance holistic;Fayette Place should have been included in the AA. Housing bond.;Affordability is a big issue - provide housing and maintain it;making homeownership attainable for all;transitional housing;lack of investment in Housing;Southside horribly run;consideration for low income housing outside of downtown.;frustration over affordability of Housing;Affordable housing for everyone - including those making less than $25,000;freedom and more options of housing, safe, physically, meeting standards and codes;Investment in homeownership, community assisted.;affordable housing that is also accessible;Cohousing;multi-unit housing with smaller unit sizes .  more people could afford to live there .  could help support local businesses;Continue promoting Co-housing (a neighborhood that co-owns shared facilities; i.e. regold community meals;Housing is an issue - low priced homes aren't selling, renting is almost more than a mortgage, stability in renting, preventing spikes in rent, pushing citizens out.;There is affordable housing in Durham, it's just not where is ideal;More than 50% of new residents rent and can't buy;mismatch people's ability to buy houses - rental market is brutal, low cost housing purchases;Avenue to get into affordable housing;Affordable housing in downtown;Apartments and affordability;Fix affordable housing neighborhoods;Durham Housing Authority is doing several of these. Old *illegible* headquarters - site will be mixed use;Want to change: fix affordable housing. Should be possible for a person of any means to live in Durham. Want mixed income area geographically.;Tiny apartments - big buildings with small units. Luxury apartments. Prices were different then.;Would be nice to mandate affordable units within new development. .  housing bond. ;DHA redevelopment. Mixed use, integrated uses. Mixed income.;Continuing north Durham discussion- want mixture of housing in complete communities ;It would be good for the city to have an apartment registry, to inspect them regularly. More protections for tenants. More protections in case of emergency. Emergency shelters - you only have 30 days to search for housing.;Landlords must maintain their buildings. The City must do more. Citizens do not know where to complain. If people think that the City doesn't care, then they don't care.;Rapid re-housing progress utilizing tiny homes;"housing first" mentality in Durham ;Affordable and attainable housing ;Housing - near places of multiuse functions  and  affordable;Concerned about concentration of affordable housing in one area.;Make sure Affordable housing is built the same as market;Expanding housing choices still doesn't address missing middle housing;Affordable housing as a necessary element of all new development;Start discussing about rent control like in New York?;make it possible for people to live near where they work. work in the city, you should be able to live in the city;everyone have a home;in an ideal Durham: quality housing: HUD-we pay our taxes;Housing - work with absentee landlords to make healthy.;Landlord and tenant res;housing options;affordable and accessible housing for aging populations;mixed income buildings;duplexes, complexes, multi-family dwellings that are not sky scrapers in neighborhoods where there are single family homes. add accessible dwelling units;zoning  developers have right to build e.g. a 2500 square foot house could also build a 3,000 square foot house if it's multi-unit or can only build a mcmansion if it's multi-use;there is a generation of people who cannot afford a mortgage;need more Know Your Rights info in English and Spanish;need more eviction diversion for developers chomping at the bit. ;character-mix of lot sizes is an example. small acre 1/8 to 1 full acre mix of people income levels and characters and green space being lost;Housing security for working class community members;10% affordable housing;Access to homeownership ;$ to help repair or restore homes;Housing security;increasing home-ownership opportunities;affordable place to live-in between worlds now. don't want to be out further, what does housing bond turn into?;It makes me angry that new apartment complexes aren't required to have affordable housing;Mixed income development - not isolating low income;Adu, Granny Flats;Diversity of Housing stock (Ex: Trinity park); Duplex and Triplex, Townhomes, Apartments;Cannot require setting aside affordable housing units or having rent control. ;Living places - residences;Affordable housing;Lack of affordable housing.;Need to spread expanding housing choices outside urban tier. Also, expand boundaries of urban tier.;Public housing - Dillon's rule versus Home rule.;Skyrocketing housing costs.;Skyrocketing cost of housing. Durham used to be affordable.;Would like everybody to be able to afford housing. ;Affordable housing is really important and ensuring quality of life and access to green space. New buildings should have energy efficiency to keep costs low for people. ;Cool to hear Anthony Scott talk about how the bond will be spent. Encouraged to hear this. ;Land trust and increasing incomplete and systems - person had to leave but earning potential hasn't change. Not punishing people in these situations.;Rental prices changing based on markets - people have to know about this.;Affordable housing.;Affordable housing outside of downtown, racially diverse;Where can people who ride the bus in Durham afford to live?;Allow people to age in place without raising rents;City needs to be move forward with Fayette place and mixed use development;Durham 2030: affordable housing that allows people....?;future Durham: affordable housing;future Durham : there will be all different kinds of housing, like now, but apartment buildings will be larger, cleaner, and more appealing to all sorts of people, instead of one particular group ;rents are skyrocketing;alternative models for affordable housing: cooperatives, Vienna model, other alternatives?, whole-communities and services co-located and centered around housing, not relegated to lowest of incomes, de-stigmatize housing for low-income community (make it high quality);rental affordability-needs some stabilization-rent control?;sell-back programs to residents;non-market solutions;Wants more mixed-housing - why don’t we have more. All condos  and  apartments are too expensive. Housing types need to be varied. Vary the prices of these types.;Development should create different types of housing.;Middle class housing;Housing types (ADVS);Mixed, fixed ratio housing types (pricing size) ;Allow accessory dwelling units and flexible housing options (triplex, duplex, street lighting  and  highway lighting).;More affordable housing;More middle class housing;Diversity of types of housing in neighborhoods, leads to diverse people.;Fayette place - act on promise to provide affordable housing on that site.;Regulations to provide housing diversity within some developments for smaller families.;Provide help to community land trust.;Match homeowners with people who want to rent within their home. Such as home share programs.;Smaller footprint for housing.;Need accessible dwelling units  and  housing code - do what other cities are not doing.;Low income and section 8 people have hard time finding houses.;The City needs a Land Bank for affordable housing.;Help young professionals to get grants to build housing . Private homeowners would sacrifice land if get $ (dollars, money).;Housing, education, jobs. ;housing;stop evictions (filings), resources;housing affordable;Minneapolis just outlawed single family - could limit to a certain core;Laws so that people that are kicked out of their homes have a legitimate reason and enough time (more than 2 weeks) to move.;Bond and  encouragement proud;300, 500 E Main and the existing;Getting involvement from the disabled community that would address what they need. App system that can help sign impacted individuals that provides audible instructions. Including some type of this technology for future developments, parks, government offices, churches.;Involve Hispanic community in larger Durham community. ;An updated development review process that is more inclusive for small, local developers;what I like about Durham: how much of the population feels like they have a stake;Virtual redlining is the new comp phase - lack of technology voids realtors from participating to lack of profits. ;concerns: all citizens are not having input, all citizens are being considered in the future, tax increases, traffic;development shaped around current population, not shaped by future population;intergenerational wealth transfer;Feel like everyone has a place in Durham: Open spaces, public places;Everyone can enjoy "renaissance"; has something close at hand, has a voice;Accessibility, shared prosperity;Struggle with connection between districts or within districts. Scared about Duke cutting itself off. Scared of transit options going away. ;Planning department-lack of minorities in department and government. ;Vibe, sense of community. Bustling city but still small town feel. Ability for people to talk and work things out.  Parts are all different. Go a couple of blocks and it changes. Eclectic. Diversity - staged community. ;Durham working together across all demographic lines;everyone problem solving across genders and races - people in leadership listen and try to implement;I really appreciate the City's efforts to be inclusive and bring in more voices.;Integrated;Integrated - economic;Integrated - mix of houses sizes and types and people;Great for everybody;emphasis on underrepresented communities ;system requires formal language and formal dress;people stereotype and paint with a broad brush;There are repeat patterns of non-progressive policies, certain voices not being heard;use new revenues from grant to help make Durham more inclusive.;Come up with a shared vision where every stakeholder is involved;Inclusion;Equality for immigrant community - how are we including and advocating for;Equal opportunity. ED, housing, safety, transportation. See people who are not aware of, don't have time for. ;less spatial segregation;Likes grass roots. yay! ;Urban and rural - bridge it ;Durham could not get a Durham native elected to Council;We need to be more inclusive so that all benefit from new jobs and growth and prosperity;Would like to see more representation and participation in elections;People are welcoming. We like that.;People at table represents the entire community. Intentional representation. ;This is a critical time for decision making. People at the table doing decision making need to be varied  and  well-represented.;progressive council won't translate into progressive policies;Values in Parks, Downtown, Walkability. Is something ideal to me ideal to someone else. Make sure all values are heard;more inclusive-pay attention to smaller groups of people;More representation of the community which is being served. This will allow for a better understanding of struggles different populations face;Inclusive participation - ideas from everybody. ;More representation of people serving in government;ideal Durham: where people have as strong of a voice as corporations;Fragility at all levels!;comp plan: look at it holistically;Holistic;holistic approach-mindset;holistic;An alternative form of ID to access services;2 way street rather than 1 way to slow;End uni-directional and one-way streets;No downtown loop or one-way streets;Signage and wayfinding for streets, buildings, etc. This would help in reducing wrong way.;Accessibility and connectivity;Decentralize power systems ;Entrances to the City more inviting i.e. along highways;Bike lanes expensive but needed - connected network of bike lanes for convenience;protected bike lanes-awareness of bike lanes;hope: protected bike lanes;Keeping bike lanes clear with more cleaning;bike lanes are weird how they turn;spacing for bike lanes;who to report "bike lane" type issues to??;Don't see a need to expand bike lanes - it's unsafe. I can tolerate 1 lane by we don't have much space - bikers don't have protection;Connect our communities, neighborhood to neighborhood;Accessibly connected, Multimodal: scoot, walk, bike, transit. Whole network;connected transportation alternatives (bike and pedestrian lanes that connect);intentionally, actively trying to address inequities. Better roads, sidewalks, parks, why have certain areas not had this investment? Everyone can access economics, environment, education, health;Love all the new sidewalks but not all areas;equity in roads and infrastructure in general;Storm water - Ideally if infrastructure should be distributed equally, equitably .;East Durham  and  Duke Park - no sidewalks, no tree coverage, no bike lane;;want more equitability among resources;Storm water infrastructure equity;We need better infrastructure. We are not victims of growth, we've invited it. ;Quality construction should be required not shoddy.;Need less asphalt;Street lighting ;Municipal broadband please.;leaking natural gas pipes;Inclusion of North Durham or other perimeter communities in connection discussions. Learn from downtown experiences and be proactive in that area.;Street level businesses with parking above or below;More parking meters ;Durham where we don't have to think, "will there be parking";a way to get to Raleigh without driving on 40;Road quality is pretty bad throughout Durham as there are several potholes;Better roadways and highways through the City (on both City and State streets) where there are not any potholes damaging vehicles;Focus on what we have with current roads;Stop widening roads - it makes traffic worse and costs $ ;Self-driving cars how will that changes infrastructure, how we drive cars, build roads. ;sidewalks-developments to build on both sides, more robust sidewalks, equity in sidewalk infrastructure;More sidewalks;Improve sidewalks that are being warped by tree roots;certain areas in Durham that does not have sidewalks;sidewalks at least on one side of the street especially near schools;sidewalks that continue;More pedestrian and bicycle friendly infrastructure;Sidewalk and bike lane safety needed and streetlights needed;Large sidewalks, bike lanes - trees help it feel less scary on the road;sidewalks and pedestrian access;Need more sidewalks, connecting ;Had to walk on the highway to get to the bus - that should not be the experience;Better signage at Jackie Robinson and on bike trails;Electric smart grid - public;storm water fee?;Want to change: I'll age as we go 10-15 years forward. Friends with disabilities have trouble getting around. Paratransit. An uber-like service for municipal. City-broadband. Municipal broadband. Uber is not good. Want a municipal version. Uber is expensive.;Roads and public transportation ;more consistent bike lanes, more connected network;Bus shelters, south branch of library- Alston, Cornwallis. Less affected areas. No shelter on shelter, flooding. Sidewalks are expensive. Windows get broken.;Roads in disrepair: There are neighborhoods that are constantly being repaved (Hope Valley Farms) that are not as well-traveled as roads while highly traveled roads are in critical need of repair. My top 3: 1) Angier Avenue from Main to East End Avenue; 2) Pettigrew Street from Ellis Road to Bacon Street; 3) Lawson Street and Briggs Avenue near the entry to 147 and crossing over 147 up to Pettigrew Street. Due to the reroute of Highway 70 traffic, Ashe and Hardee Streets has a gigantic pothole in the corner with is ridiculous! If you drove through East Durham in general, you will find deep pot holes on just about every street.;We are sitting at Carrington. There is a post office, high schools, etc. but there are no sidewalks for me to be able to walk. Benefits to me if there were more sidewalks. Sidewalk infrastructure has to be a part of this system. We have to have a safe community first so that those walking are safe. Ideally we can require that developers add sidewalks. ;We need safe sidewalks. in good shape. It's dark at night-need street lights. I would like to walk more abut I don't like to get harassed on the street: whether it's unwanted attention or people asking for money;sidewalks and less obstructed sidewalks;more sidewalks-everywhere-de-silo-less isolation;Current storm water infrastructure is woefully inadequate to handle increasingly bad storms  and  volume of water. Updates greatly needed!;businesses need good utilities including internet;better infrastructure planning;Internet access everywhere;storm water;intentionally address inequities in infrastructure;More proactive about planning infrastructure with reality of climate change - take it seriously;add internet everywhere;develop infrastructure for the future ;Hwy 55 cent c18;Forest Hills 100 year old water sewer lines; waiting until it breaks;Key middle infrastructure = mid level;municipal internet;Free internet for low-income households (or everyone);need better roads ;Infrastructure built before people live these - bus routes, highway routes before people ;I could see them on Hillandale repaving every year, but Fayetteville stayed with potholes;Something should be done with Umstead St.;no pot holes, focusing on low income areas;less hostile architecture (i.e. "no slap park benches);Broadband Accessibility: work place is changing so we need better access and quality. Entire community need easier andfaster access which enables more people to work at home;Water mains breaks in the last couple -6 or 7 breaks from the cold spell in the last couple days?;Infrastructure is needed. ;Cannot see the lines on the street;More lighting, better wayfinding signage, better lane markings are needed particularly in bad weather;Clear street names;Better signage, wayfinding, and highway and street lighting;Computer system is important for visually impaired.  dependent on Smartphone;DOT has no plans to widen Lelle road;Roadways need to be planned in future;Roads need to keep up with development;Water quality concerns - black rings in bathtub (comments on NextDoor) - perception (city water) that it's not safe even though told that its safe; more publicity about the quality of the water and what is safe, better education  and  communication; one person freaks out then everybody does;Quality of internet is terrible and shoddy and there seems to be a monopoly; don't want to pay arm and a leg; how to have better more consistent and affordable internet for all.  how can City and County impact that?;Infrastructure should truly help businesses flourish;Coordinate road construction notifications;Infrastructure mismatch with density; seed area of where infrastructure has potential to support more density (starting point);Improved rather than keep up;Roads are deteriorating.;Improve internet accessibility.;Storm water controls aren't good.;Sidewalks. Payment in lieu systems. Sidewalks are fragmented. Possibly because of rules for how developers pay for them.;Roads are deteriorating. They get worse with weather.;Availability of clean water. At some of the droughts.;Tuscaloosa - Lakewood - as new development comes in, more storm water, grading issues come up.;Sewage capacity on a regional scale.;Internet coverage. Need more equitable distribution. Expanded coverage. Affordable.;DHA free public Wi-Fi at housing projects.;More speed bumps. ;I like the new roundabouts - it slows down traffic.;Reconfigure traffic downtown to slow down traffic.;Would like to see truly protected bike lanes and sidewalks.;Durham's water - important to have a price and not shut people's water off. People who can afford to pay, should. ;Consideration of water ways  and  drinking water, especially by developers. ;Convert Duke and Gregson and Downtown Loop;improve infrastructure, capacity water and sewer;Water safety - concerns we want systems where infrastructure doesn't lead to bad water.;Don't want Flint, MI;Street lighting ;BCC is only freeway to get downtown. Electric scooters help some.;Incentivize residential storm water management.;connected networks;If the plan could just connect 2-3 neighborhoods, that might be good.;Free public broadband;public Wi-Fi;How can we help the rural areas get access to technology? ;Require builders to contribute funds designed to help people who want to live in those buildings ;Builders should have to pay for the building subsidies;grant money should be for Black people in all areas not just certain areas;Having smaller commercial located around the city near where investments are being made with the housing bond would be great;Who is Durham valuing? ;can't stop working to go to those classes. invest in human labor;government support in regional investment hubs.;Small local investment opportunities on land where buildings have been demolished;It seems that where city spends $, the values goes up. I wish they'd spread it out;circular economy;Downtown not "the only place". we distributed access, things to do, more things to do into the neighborhoods. Change the zoning to bring people and activity to other neighborhoods. One of reasons for downtown's whiteness.  We are concentrating everyone with money in downtown. Solution is spread out. Zoning helps. ;If someone is benefitting from the community, then an obligation to re-contribute;Ideal Durham needs to be prosperous, not just about wealth but about people care to keep it in great shape.;an ideal Durham: equal opportunity for advancement and development in all neighborhoods, in addition to and not just downtown;Put money where your values are;Need to be putting money into the pockets of those who need it the most;Keep supporting non profits;City contracts - more black and brown;Too much $ goes outside City;Keep supporting non profits;New library and Durham Girls Soccer league are good examples of investing in Durham;trust in the process-good use of data in the plan, fact based decision-making;trust issues;Durham left out people from Durham, downtown growth is good;Northgate park other neighborhoods cut off by highways - close to downtown but not good access. Dangerous intersection;0 folks being left behind;Downtown community is not welcoming - previous businesses that people supported are no longer there - not necessarily African-Americans but long time residents.  had to go to 4 places to get a Heineken - black men don't drink craft beer.  it's the little things that make you feel welcome or not;Include neighborhoods cut off area downtown by highways;stories about resurgence-but unequal resurgence;re-visit the forgotten places-no more forgotten people, pockets, places;147 feels like it divides our community-South of it is great;because there's a lot of new people in the area-how can they be integrated in a way to create community? I don't have a "group"-maybe a generational or a new people moving in feeling;When we moved in, people who have lived here 50 years welcomed us, and we invited them.;Influx of white, education, high income population;Soul and character preservation. Local business emphasis.;cultural translation-how do we educate transplants and not lose our history and mandate for those moving here to learn and become a part of it;Love current size of Durham, but has heard new people make 10,000 more a year than residents,. will lose diversity quickly. ;Concern about newcomers and building condos for new people. Equity issue;Durham should put more action, better than just words. Native Durham's not seeing benefits of Development. people from other places coming to Durham for high paying job-like Cary, Raleigh, etc.;"Sometimes we are as big as we can be" We care about the people that are here, not just the new residents who make a lot more money than existing residents.  Let's make room and keep space for those that are already here.;NC Central grads and others can't get jobs here-outsiders taking them;Allow existing residents to invest before newer folks?;downtown, community who have lived here all their life;Equal increases in prosperity of region not just gentrifiers and transplants;Transplants looking toward people who live here for leadership;Interest in who's already here.;Don't give subsidies to businesses to come here.;Plan needs to serve Durhamites first;People who live there;McDougald Terrace-residents deserve equitable services and good policy;Durham is pretty good for me: because I'm middle class and white. Other people may need improvements. Median income increased. ;Middle class Durham - not rich, poor:;gentrification is an issue;need Black owned businesses downtown;an ideal Durham: black business; housing for the community as a whole; affordable;What is going to happen to POC owned businesses in Northgate Mall? (How can we promote small, local, POC businesses);Black-owned whiskey bar no longer there.  just another example of how different things have changed;preservation of black owned businesses;Black owned businesses - small parcels available, businesses;Black owned businesses, small parcels available for small businesses;Black-owned and people of color-owned businesses;More POC-owned business;POC-owned businesses;More local businesses with people of color;More black-owned business;Mixed income in neighborhoods;an ideal Durham: a lot of residential and commercial close together;hope: variety of housing types in close proximity: apartments, houses, duplexes (no spread of single family homes of all the same size and price). commercial and residential mixed use;Pocket neighborhoods with a block or two of commercial activity.;Where and how people live: more public spaces (especially if surrounded by restaurants, farmers market, store). Everyone has a comfort zone with a variety of living environments (large lots, rural, to downtown living) but developing for density with things they need (i.e. grocery store). So do not need to drive a long distance for what need. provide based on population density. Not necessarily new building or space - more reuse, think differently;I like the blocks or two of commercial close to neighborhoods - like 9th street and west end. Accessible by foot or bike - like pocket neighborhoods. Neighborhood places facilitate community. Durham could do more of this.;Walkability and mixed use dispersed throughout city is desirable. And services should be functional, not just high-end boutique-y type places;More walkable areas with mixed use similar to ninth St.;I like Golden Belt--it has more variety than a typical mixed use development;Mixed use building and zoning;move away from zoning that supports for residential development of land only-people's ability to live together is increased-more mixed commercial residential;Not a single family unit focus;Zoning needed businesses in residential areas - small grocery stores and gas stations, etc.;Mixed use;Redevelopment of Forest Hills and Lakewood shopping centers (multimodal);Abandoned shopping centers facing blight can be converted to mixed-use;mix use - Hillsborough Rd and La Salle St - Redevelop as mix use ;Vertical mixed use ;"Forest Hills Heights" at Lakewood and @ Blackwell - will take out the existing homes and build mixed use. What's  the time frame?;Going back to vertical mixed use, with retail on first floor and residential office on second floor.;Mixed use buildings may cause conflict between residential and commercial uses such as noise, privacy, more separation between areas and uses;In china have more specific allowable uses in areas. Example: only residential or service residential uses in one area ;Mixed use in suburban areas (in China) so do not need to travel to downtown areas with public transportation. Multiple uses like restaurants, stores near residential;Clustering of uses and mixed-uses with better access;Design of public spaces that foster interaction and co-site well with mixed-use spaces;Nodal development - employment concentration, adding urban amenities, mixed-use dev., walkable;More mixed use development;Activate ground levels.;live and work in same place;A patchwork of complete communities;Private lakes then let everyone have access, not just $1M homes. ;Wildlife, become a bird friendly city setting;Lights off policy for tall buildings to save bird population;Maximizing environmental priorities without gentrification; dense city that doesn't trample others; and city's history-a neighborhood protection overlay too late; gentrification-large buildings not small bungalows; forced displacement of people;Protects remaining farmland. Having great food needs a core group of small farms selling at the farmers market.;Need more open space for wildlife habitat;Focus more on keeping forests, larger green spaces;environmental protection are almost non-existent for sensitive natural areas-Developers are allowed to cut down forests with almost no restriction;land use rules are pitting tree canopy and affordable housing against each other;run on trails and greenways in town, near where I live;I want to see protection of natural areas-currently developers can cut down whole forests with very limited restrictions. this is reckless in face of climate change, flooding, survival of natural areas and species;Strong, large, sustained urban forest;Trees required for all developments;Clear cutting - not attraction but better now that 20% maintain trees;Maintaining rural tier around County;lots of open space - protected farmland around the country;Farmland;access to the environment;greening of neighborhoods ;A lot more trees! (trees that were planted are dying) - diversity in trees, new plantings survive (no more willow oaks);can live in the city but have easy access to county and rural ;Concerns about losing natural environment;Incentives to promote tree preservation and reclamation ;Save chimneys - tobacco warehouse reuse. Migrating birds rest in large industrial chimneys. Important to long distance migration. Example: Duke and Trinity chimney.;Ellerbe Creek SW=> hope it goes through. Would be good park amenity;Importance of preserving open space; especially given declining bird population;national and local development impact on bird habitats;Increased awareness of parks - nature in the city.  west point on the Eno.;Natural places - beautiful and should be maintained and protected in region. ;Clear cutting of trees in development ;wetland protection ;Protecting H2O Quality - our resources;losing birds at an alarming rate;we don't all live in downtown Durham: focus on areas outside of core, protect tree canopy;fund land conservation;Ellerbe Creek as a central feature and vein through the city;wildlife corridors and significant natural heritage area;change zoning to put teeth into regulations that protect our tree canopy in areas where still have trees (before allowing further high-density development);tree canopy is great;Keep planting trees ;I like Durham's trees;Habitat loss;more native plants - which benefit ecosystem;Growth must respect the environment - storm water concerns about statewide water ecosystem - Landon Farms Example;Falls lake must be protected from development;More trees throughout Durham, particularly East Durham;Too many trees are being cut down for new development;pocket gardens of pollinator and bird habitat;community garden spaces with trees;that protects undeveloped spaces-leaving wild life corridors to Jordan and Falls Lake;Eno River associations, wildlife corridors, plan between ENO. and New Hope, corridor, Duke Forest;Open space, green space improvements, wildlife corridors.;Improve existing parks and expand nature preserves.;A concrete idea to promote wildlife friendly spaces would be for the City of Durham to become a certified wildlife habitat by the National Wildlife Federation. It would be a real distinctive status for the City. Ashville and Charlotte are certified, as is the town of Cary. I would be willing to help make this happen ;Feel like keeper of the woods in South Durham. Won't sell land in order to keep trees.;More bird friendly city - increase biodiversity, habitat for pollinators;Favor native plans;;Eliminate invasive plants;Minimize pesticides;Education of native plants and  make illegal the sale of non-native species.;Wild life corridors, bridges over 40  and  85 - no mow zones are positive.;Lots of trees, I don't like clearcutting for development. I understand the need for density in some places. I hate the wat Raleigh is sprawled. I love that in Durham, I can be in the woods in 15 minutes. ;The trees in the city are not well treated. Lines could be put underground.;trees;Thriving wildlife;Bird friendly windows;Pollution problems--split up neighborhoods;Southern village and Meadowmont, but more affordable neighborhoods;sustainable commercial development. support activities in neighborhood that are inclusive;Takes people in neighborhood to keep it clean.;Used to be a mixed community, not very white. Gentrification, higher taxes, overcrowding as people squeeze into what they can afford, too much over $200,000 housing.;Neighborhoods, HOA militant about personal land use. Should be allowed to use gravel if don't want grass, etc. Poisonous to maintain healthy grass (herbicide and pesticide) water table effects. State feels HOA can require this. ;Expensive Housing is neighborhoods where there has not always been;integrated neighborhoods and schools;More mixed-age neighborhoods;Intergenerational communities and neighborhoods;Neighborhood accessible to all necessary amenities;Potentially having sidewalks in neighborhoods to increase sense of community;Keep neighborhoods stable - be able to keep long and stay where they are;Let's beautify neighborhoods! Plant trees: Keep Durham beautiful is a good resource and trees Durham. Should the City invest in what she's doing?;Lived somewhere that decided what community could look like and was strict about it - if you go there today it looks the same. ;Design guidelines. Things should be beautiful, not just functional. City has a right to demand beautiful design.;Focus on neighborhoods so unique identities can show thru but still be connected to one another;neighborhoods connect hubs with transport, each areas  with a unique identity - we connect and visit but we've got that sense of neighborhood ex) preserved old mural, preserve past and making a new vision;making people share neighborhoods;we're still building big, sprawling neighborhoods;Suburban developments in Durham need more design standards to ensure more connectivity and livability - sidewalks, bike lanes, access to open space, etc.;more statues  and  structures (memorable);beautiful;clean - no more trash!;Ideal Durham would mean you could drive to any neighborhood and think it looks pretty good.;Abandoned buildings are not good;new apartment look nice;European model Southern Village and Meadowmont self contained with grocery, church, schools;Nice welcome sign ;walkable, self supporting neighborhoods ;better handle on trash and litter ;Trash comes off of trash trucks ;Neighborhoods have different needs ;They need to find a solution that isn't pushing and knocking everything down.;Better streets - new buildings beside old buildings are jarring.;mixed income neighborhood;Home designs changing;Pride in appearance;losing character and diversity of older neighborhoods in Durham. concentric circles has no relevance to what's on the ground;love compact neighborhood concept;rural residential zone: protect 3 acre limit, buffers;Neighborhood community feel;Don't like concrete towers downtown. ;Neighborhood based future.;Preserving the neighborhood and culture;Character - historic and otherwise.;interrupts  and  disrupts character of neighborhood, is a barrier to knowing your neighborhood. Same for subdivisions - belong versus not belong. ;True neighborhood feel instead of town houses.;More authentic architecture.;Everything should have some beauty to it.;Development in neighborhood has been clear cutting down to dirt; huge homes mixed with historically smaller homes. Connect and fit with existing neighborhood. Less focus of city to protect this. ;Protect character of older neighborhoods - protect what makes them desirable. Press growth to outer areas vs. infill. ;Maintain existing neighborhood character  and  not infill.;Changes in Northgate area;Keep neighborhoods' sense of pride, character, and history;Connect neighborhoods (break through cul-de-sacs and dead ends);Give thought to the noise levels. Allow leaf blowers during certain hours. ;Consider noise levels even in urban areas  and  leaf blowers.;Black and Brown poverty vs. white privilege;Less income disparity - without the solution to be moving lower income people out of Durham;I worry about those with lower property value if there's a financial crisis.;freedom from poverty ;wealth gap - reckon with this?!;concerns about pockets of poverty are shocking;see poverty everyday;poor people exceptions;Clean up public areas--using civilians who aren't working;Summer music events were great-Durham should do those again-a way to get engaged in community;Park programs access--culturally affirming;More Latino visibility  and  events.;We enjoyed the very diverse music, for free, in American Tobacco Campus. it used the open space well;rooftop yoga, farmer's market, get a ride to the Eno to hike, have dinner downtown-does not include South Durham;More vibrant ATC with regular events and retail space;The Bull Moon Rising event was great-brought in all kinds of people. Like this, at Unscripted all kinds of people come to dance;Should Durham provide some of the spaces that Duke provides? Public theaters and music hall and dance halls?;A gap is family-oriented activities: music in the summer at parks; free to everyone, bring cooler and kids. Would like to see frequent City-sponsored activities;Breadth of activities, locally owned restaurants.;I love the downtown area-interested in things to do. Things in downtown that had meaning have been pushed out: it was like a park to sit out with dogs, kids, entertainment at American Tobacco Campus; diverse culture with big turnout-salsa lessons; it seems to have been going away little by little;Got some ideas from book "urban alchemy".;(Summary of drawing) An ideal Durham would have parks and trails, housing options for all,  place making and free places, culturally diverse public spaces, transit options, limit sprawl, multiple "central business districts" where people live;We have a friend who opened a new entertainment center-it would have been nice to have that downtown-maybe the rest downtown is too expensive;Community centers outside urban core-in rural areas too;Use libraries as social centers ;people of color areas less plentiful and less safe. Not seeing people of color downtown. Comfort of downtown is gone for POC.;Dog friendly (park and restaurants), easy to park and walk and  bike, perception of safety, not a lot of chain restaurants, varying price levels of vendors;Community centers where high gang presence - give options other than gangs for sense of security, guidance, education. Cooking component - food preparation classes;Reimagine school property as public property (i.e. playgrounds);I'd like to see basket ball courts! Also volleyball and soccer and baseball and mountain bike trails;I was impressed with the number of swimming facilities;I like a place that has parks, athletic fields where residents enjoy each other. Instead of one center, have a networked city with neighborhoods that are jewels for different reasons. Everyone has a grocery store that can walk to. Supported community gardens.;The City does a good job organizing events to bring people together (music, famers market);Enjoyed Durham Pride this year;Job and work - need activities outside of work hours that's a safe space be in a community - not just with other people with monitoring, facilitating, supporting is a gap. Chapel Hill has more going on;These are other spaces in Durham for communities of color;Healthy lifestyle community - parks, sw, greenspace, swimming pools;more green and gathering spaces downtown that invites more activity ;Duke Gardens is a welcoming place -liberation station;greenspace downtown, gathering place;Food and arts events;Durham has some great parks, park are in poorer neighborhoods then Improve parks that are existing;Lived in cities, wants more people being active in the parks, in the shops, more vibrancy on the streets, going to events.;Improve and invest in parks across the city. ;Organizations  and  groups who have historically been able to hold festivals and celebrations in downtown and desirable places should be given an equitable way to continue to do so without getting priced out. ;More signage, sponsorship of parks and natural resources (Outdoor recreational, museums, etc.). ;Better parks;Choc - full of parks carbon neutral, progressive city, walkable, bikeable, bond referendum, housing density, public housing;Late night soccer.;Completion of mountains to sea trail;Libraries as localized transit hubs so they get highest transit level of service and other services;Greenways are not being implemented fast enough;Grand central park in Durham - Hillside park;Convert NC 147 into a big park;Old ballpark turned into soccer park;Pocket parks Downtown - more greenery;Destination museum like a history museum and facilities for rent by residents and unique building;future Durham: walking, art, outdoor spaces;2030 visions: more parks;future Durham: libraries!!;more parks and open spaces: not enough activities for families and children, not enough downtown;more public spaces;more public restrooms for those active outside;parking garages for adaptive re-use;utilize strip malls as adaptive re-use sites and repurpose (i.e. scrap exchange);Is there any where is Durham I can dance? AKA "shake my buttocks";good things: like Braggtown library. want to have national night out, community garden, fresh harvest;D. Town investment. More cultural opportunities (DPAC, Carolina Theater, Central Park, Nasher, etc.);Thoughtfully created public spaces interconnected. More sporting facilities.;Large convention center  space and more hotel space.;Museums, galleries.;More public spaces places for tournaments, concerts, sports;Museums Galleries;Retail Space;Greenspace, public art, community spaces;Dirt Bike and ATV park would be nice.;greenspace, public art, community space - music, see and get to know each other;followed friends here, fun;public space - community centers;Public space for meetings, coworking, art classes, music, pot lucks;programs  and  grassroots events like dinners, oval park, food truck rodeo, concerts, block parties;Cool - arts, music, warehouses;Foodie - restaurants, education - tourism;Farm-to-fork needs farmers, tourism;public parks, outdoor venues for impromptu gatherings and entertainment;a large central gathering space - Durham Central Park is too small! - served by bike lanes and transit;Fun activities in seasons other than summer.;Museums, different things that could attract wider range of demographics, diverse, different backgrounds. Walk downtown, left and right. I don't know how big we are to get a zoo, but something that's like - wow!;One thing I love about Durham cool hip place to be. But I don't feel all people in Durham are empowered to participate. DPAC, Beyu - Paid shows. Maybe could be more diverse, not just catered to people who are established.;I feel like I've had a different experience venues, festivals, less established lots of music venues.;Durham is great. For everybody (I can experience a lot of things, love it, but not everyone can);More community centers;A park director at each park with activities for everybody;More community center and activities;We have great places to go outside;More things to do but too expensive;Like Bulls stadium and Bulls games;DPAC was a great addition to the city;Need more community Centers for k Athletic stuff. Music room. Like ping pong;Nice recreational spaces - Eno River, wildlife, creeks ;underfunded parks in East Durham - could have other amenities ;Northgate Mall;more amenities, stores, restaurants;Community Centers;thoughtful well planned commercial areas to allow for short car trip.;Continue building great community spaces that are public and inclusive.  like the new library.;always something to do;needs kids soccer program. Need a forest theater. Need more spaces like central park. Spread around the city..  can help seed private development in other areas..  example: Greenspace @ Golden Belt;hard to find public meeting spaces.;Provide spaces that are for existing communities that exist. Not just breweries.;Festival on the Eno;The "Ironpour".  associated with Liberty Arts organization. Pour into molds=> create new things.  community spectacle.;Bullmoon Rising: great activation of public space: meeting other people;Beaver Queen festival: uniquely Durham. Drag festival in Duke Park. "the weirdest thing you have ever seen" raises support for Ellerbe Creek.;Library access;New library in April. Library;More community activities for new residents (population increasing quickly) then programs, engagement, attract new people and get them to stay, maybe tours like Duck tours in Pittsburg;Make 9th st pedestrian only close off cars.;Quality of Life - internet, clean water, safety, parks, inviting downtown, dog friendly;An ideal Durham would have more community centers where people can meet the libraries help, but more is needed.;clean , activities going on downtown, partly grass area for families;More dog-friendly - more dog pick up stations; perception of acceptance;Code for Durham - Adopt a Drain app - could develop something similar to show dog-friendly locations and stations;Move community centers where people can meet - libraries are good, but would be good to have more neighborhood places for connection (information, hangout space, restrooms);Kiosks around town to post ideas and cultural events (like Chapel Hill);Destination points like Ninth St. or Downtown also available in North or East Durham;parks near shopping and food;recreation outside of shopping and dining;multi use of space (i.e. more use of farmer market space i.e. lunching);Community events.;Durham museums.;Keep the Durham Bull square.;Libraries around different areas of town.;What I like about Durham:;Museums;What I like about Durham:;The libraries;artistic community events.;Always something happening. Cultural sports. ;Without pickleball.;Disparity in access to athletic facilities. ;Active recreation areas.;More soccer. ;Like the diversity, change of seasons, activities, lots of things to do.;Mixed-use meeting centers for organizations.;Accessible public space.;ideal Durham: community gathering spaces;Community gathering spaces. ;Better athletic facilities and parks. Wake County has beautiful softball and baseball fields, basketball hoops, lined fields - a baseball , softball complex that brings in money from other places.;We should find the right sport for Durham to host.;Recreation, parks;Improve rec facilities and park. ;Communities with public space on first floor. ;More parks;Parks for sports activities;some places are off limits because of skin color and hair ;Racism is still here, it's not getting better;Regional transportation to connect areas by bus routes. I would take the bus if it didn't take 4 hours a day.;All these plans, would be great to have buy in, real support from major employers  and  institutions. Duke, RTP, RDU. Need to work together, not disjointed.;Regional system would be a benefit;spikes out to the suburbs make sense;Regional integration - we are part of a metro area - take a regional approach to certain issues;You need to have a straight shot train from Durham to Chapel Hill in ten minutes, and connect to buses. It may have been slow with not many riders.;Denver has sister city does Durham?;City needs to better partner with non-profits and tap into resources that are already here;Durham spends $ on outside resources when homegrown non-profits are doing AMAZING things; also tap into the universities that are here;Community (?) separate type of (?) for low income - resources. Opportunity to own property;How are framing how opportunities are framed? ;access to resources at a city-wide level;more information on resources in community;distribution of equal resources;Priority zones: need to improve, increase resources, students aren't getting what they need but there are;in an ideal Durham: basic needs are met;Bike safety. Lack of protected bike lanes. have lived in other places where I felt i could bike 100% of the time. ;concern: safety at bus stops. I see people having to cross busy streets to get to stops in mud;safety of the city and increasing crime;concern: safety in city (crime);Violence and crime reduced ;people need to feel safe. lack of police;I have colleagues who have been mugged on La Salle Rd near Duke;crosswalk near schools must be safer;Having safer communities and a safer downtown area;safety shootings;There was a shooting two blocks away, but I feel safe in my neighborhood;I like Orange Street as a public space. A lot of it has to do with light. Well-lit under a canopy of trees can be safe. There's a space in my neighborhood (Dillard and Holloway) that gets used for drug-related activity and prostitution that I avoid.;ideal Durham: safety when traveling (bike lanes, streetlights);Crime comes from underserved areas - folks who are fighting to survive.;Safe Durham. Really good schools. Really good community college. Awesome STEM programs with job training in growing sectors of the economy.;Ideal Durham - safe with good schools, safe modes of transport with predictable, transparent, ethical governance way to get voluntary collection.;Community safety - through traffic makes places unsafe;I feel unsafe when people run stop signs and traffic lights. That is where I feel least safe. people not obeying traffic laws.;I feel safer walking than driving;Clean and safe neighborhoods; transportation that is free and accessible. These things are attainable;An ideal Durham will be where I can walk at midnight and feel safe. I do not feel as safe walking in Durham as in other Cities. (Singapore, Berlin feel safe and public transit works) The transit runs almost 24/7;pedestrian safety - young children, benefits not only people who work, but seniors, kids, etc. Seniors have been injured or killed in hit-and-runs. walkways;Talk about safety among young people, violence in particular;A place where people want to face harder issues and be a part of conversation.  Safer Downtown;MLK Dr. still feels unsafe;everyone feels safe ;slow fire and police response time in some neighborhoods; neighborhood prioritization ;Safe neighborhoods;Safety in our neighborhoods, lighting, sidewalks, density (promotes activity);The shootings lately are concerning;There have been a lot of shootings;Shootings and safety;Safety - lighting streets;Lighting along streets creates dark conditions not much lighting creates dangerous conditions;Safe schools and gun control;Primarily feel safe in Durham;We are allowing conceal and carry guns;Seems powerless to address gun control at a local level ;Locally, can we address gun safety issues;Internet and social media creates problems for violence and gun violence;Can we monitor with cameras? Monitor social media for potential gun violence?;Streets Safety!;Downtown Durham used to be unsafe, it's more safe;Perception of safety - emergency poles? Provides some peace of mind.;Greenways - having housing near greenways provides eyes on the street;a lot of seniors feel unsafe - homeless people wander grounds of senior housing. See strangers and drug deals.;Constant debates about safety - is it real or just press coverage?;how can we improve perception of safety;safety in mobility;Durham to have neighborhoods and schools that are safe. ;an ideal Durham: feeling of security, a lot less crime ;control of firearms;safety-huge change in safety and policing. need to execute the plan instead of shifting continuously;task force for community safety and wellness. mobile crisis units needs a look. community safety beyond police should be looked at. ;There seems to be a resurgence of violence;Avoid "hot zones" for crime;Resurgence of violence. Hurt's Durham's reputation;Community safety - tradeoff with driving access through neighborhoods;Safe spaces;mental health issues and intersection with feeling of safety(interactions with community members on personal property is properly guided by P.D.);gun safety-managing gun ownership and access to guns in Durham;gun free overlay and district on FLUM!;sense of safety;Not seeing ghost bikes and shooting memorial - increase safety decrease ;Safety all around;Gun violence ;Safety for all.;Safer for everyone.;Some areas are safe, but others are not. We want everyone to be safe.;Safety on trails. Mugged on ATT.;Durham feels safe, everyone knows everyone. Lots of opportunities, diverse culture, lots of arts in Durham.;More speed limit enforcement.;Safer for African-American males.;future Durham: Durham becomes a safe place for young African American males;Safety = no one else present besides the driver for monitoring  and assisting ;Gun violence:;Areas where it's a problem;Downtown neighborhoods, north Durham;Levels are too high;3 murders recently;gun shots very frequent;Addressing gun violence;Place where people feel safe.;Some streets downtown hard to cross as pedestrian.;scooters can cause problems;Durham could study and report intersection between different types of schools (public, charter, etc.);"Teach evolution" - state legislature should not trickle down to local situation. State legislature passed bill that you are not allowed to use science;Wants to change: Improvements. Public schools could improve. Transportation questions. Roads and freeways seem pretty good. Infrastructure - drainage. Zoning: where really large condos and apartments get pulled in. Affordability.;an ideal Durham: community pulls together more to better support and positively highlight schools, especially in "underserved" neighborhoods;White flight is still prominent in Durham (educational system);More interpreters for kids in public schools. ;One size fits all not good. Take into account learning disabilities. We all learn differently. Combination of ways. Cultural differences. Teachers trained to be experts. Education must be tailored - takes people power.;More diverse schools;DPS - every school will be reflective of demographics around the school. Balance between. Takes the City of Durham GoTriangle Youth GoPass. - Enhance diversity of schools. Civic spaces - playgrounds: community school structure. - Youth GoPass Expansion and Fare Free. Transit in the curriculum. Land assembly for large HS;Hallmark of any good society is value of public school. Wondering how the planning comp plan intersects with public schools;Children are suffering due to lack of coordination between City and County and DPS: disparities in school resources from school to school, lack of support for teachers, talk of the have and have-nots, bullying and lack of accountability, equity issues in DPS, DPS is failing its kids;Equity issues in DPS;A thriving public school system: resources placed to attract better teachers, great schools in the area but they're not equitable, the same resources per person, charter schools have become much more expansive in Durham, People tend to live in other counties, based on school system and neighboring counties aren't playing well, more walkable schools, Diversity and inclusion in the system, consistency across the schools, schools as neighborhood centers-become the focus of a community similar to a park, bring in pilot programs to help instruct the more challenging environment;More financial resources for the public school systems; resources distributed equitably across schools;concern: school-under funded, underperforming. schools vs state, other cities, Durham's size. inequality in performance;Funding for public schools; State legislature; Durham Public Schools underfunded. Wealthy people sending kids to private schools which increases segregation. Want to send my kid to public school but also want them to have a good education and opportunities;Fund teachers. They have to buy supplies. Need to treat them as professionals. Teachers are not treated with respect. Fund them appropriately. Paid at a level that needs a second income. Need to value this profession. Educating the future.;underfunded and underperformance of schools. how should we plan for the future of schools?;More funding for schools and diversity;Better PR for Durham schools, but also changing ways schools are funded;More funding to schools;school capacity; our schools need to catch up if Durham is growing; literally more schools and building space; teachers have to float to find space for planning periods;Youth are not being taught accurate history and language;Link housing to schools to help with issues. ;more segregation in DPS than the past;Parents are confidently investing in school system;Investments in schools--need more resources;Safe, affordable, and energy efficient schools;Hire sustainability staffer for schools;Encourage sustainability in schools with a sustainability staff member. One per school or per region within County;Some sort of transportation at every school, when building schools, transportation should come hand in hand;Putting schools where it can be served by transit;education: pay our teachers better;Grow and improve Durham tech access and training options. ;Safe - good schools  and  community college, awesome stem that trains locals for our sector.;Education;Teachers move a lot, need to keep teachers in Durham, we don't pay teachers enough, good system to support public school teachers.;We need to make sure we build schools for the increased population;Need to invest more in schools. School are in poor condition, more money should go in school systems;Like the renovation of the old Hillside High  School;Education is a challenge - public education;EK Powe . Thriving, diverse, school as a good example vital;Pull up to school and not see 6 police cars, sheriff etc. in> in case something happens. Doesn't see this in some other schools;DPS doesn't have enough social workers, 0 nurses  and  need these resources;Ideal Durham 1 social worker  and  80190 students ; school made = safe, fed, psychology okay and educate family as a whole.  LeBron James school nurse parents involved in schools;Local community schools works in diverse communities;Durham Tech and NCCU unsung heroes;Bridge between High school and Durham Tech more connections;Where's vocational training? Plumbers, electricians,;Welcoming families Durham Public Schools this needs to happen = > resources to help parents understand (teaching math);Flip school idea > lecture in evenings and homework during day;Washer and dryer at schools (uniforms etc.) pre-packaged lunches at schools;nutrition in schools;school system - all kids should be able to be successful ;Durham Tech. Encourage the trade programs.;cap on charter schools;removing priority Zoning for School;Education;Going to school in an ideal Durham.  more public spaces: indoor and outdoor;In, close to neighborhood. Don't need to think about where to go to. everyone goes to go to a good school.;School policies empower teachers to do a good job. Best teachers are the ones interested in the students;Community ownership (not just parents) of schools;Universal pre-k. Reduces financial stresses around childcare;Better teacher salaries. Funding for classroom supplies;Schools as community spaces for people to gather..  encourage parents to participate.;Make schools about more than just parents: use as event spaces and community functions.;More better uses of schools as gathering places;Education quality - concern over DPS quality - may not send kids to public schools; quality education important for attracting for younger generation; families with kids.;Families moving because they feel their school is unsafe. "hoping it gets fixed by the time we need it.;More recruitment in high schoolers in job fairs.;Change: traffic, ^^illegible^^, growth combined city and county schools;All schools should have safety;Why are there not metal detectors?;Schools have fire standards and responses, but should be updated with gun safety standards;Schools safety!;NCCU support - flagship like Duke;the voice and story of "please send your kids to our schools, the schools in your neighborhood";DPS accountability and support throughout county and city services and collaboration with them;reduce advancement in development and take care of what we have now, public schools need serious work. cracks in walls, mold, holes in roofs. County hasn't focused on school infrastructure and needs to. ;Parents confidently invested in school system;There should be no child left behind in Durham;education and growing inequity is where we should start!;universities don't do enough for our community;get a strong volunteer program (NCCU, Duke, retirees) to reduce student-teacher ratio in the public schools;safety has to be ensured in the schools or volunteerism will be hard to start;educational gaps are shocking;white flight in public schools (especially Hillside)-quit leaving and invest in this;tie-in to DPS and transit;reduce student to teacher ratio;create safer schools, safer bus stops-but lack of safety is concentrated around poverty;invest in supplements for teachers;schools; counselors, teachers;public education;Universities;Public schools need more help to look better and employee good folks;Stop cutting public school funding;Possibility of year round school;Green schools - we need more;Better public schools - all.;Overcrowding of some schools.;More schools. Building more schools. Lack of a mechanism between schools and new development. LOS can we tie development to new schools? By smaller zones, rather than county-wide.;Segregation in schools is a big problem. Busing. Charter schools. Redlining connection.;School are "uneven". Uniform high quality schools. ;Hard to walk or bike to schools.;Focus on education but not just for young people.;Make adult education more accessible.;Public educations going from my neighborhoods middle schools to non neighborhood high schools. Drains high achieving students to other places. ;Developing programs for students who are on non-college paths and into trade.;Having options.;Teacher ban. ;Better support for lower functioning schools;More volunteer options for those working in schools and take kids out in Durham to see why support;future Durham: great public education;future Durham: public education funded;2030 visions: more opportunities to learn a skill vs college;impacts on capacity in DPS with growth;collaboration with all universities, more than just Duke;DPS could use land more efficiently than developers;Schools are a big issue, people get moved all the time, many problems.;Schools lack of space, lack of office space, special needs. Overcrowding, more mobile units, more resources, classroom space, overcrowding, under staffed.;Include, improve capacity in schools.;Free community college for all.;Durham Tech not accessible  and  See Wake Tech information flow.;How do the schools feed into the comprehensive plan?;Lower student-teacher ratio so teachers aren't taxed;Schools--opportunity to graduation and universities;Part of education is you have to work hard;pre K in school;Public school performance would continue to get stronger;plan for number of schools and where;education;Where people wouldn't are what school their kids want to;like it is neighborhoods commercial schools;Aging and Disability focus in Durham into the future;Heated pools and facilities for elderly near Duke - This needed in south Durham - there needs to be an equitable spread of clinics and facilities across Durham;Disabilities for seniors a lot of our buildings don't really have adequate access. There needs to be a disability assessment.;increased number of older people using transit;adult day care at high schools (for training);aging population - how to best serve intergenerational housing options ;Housing community for seniors or students;aging in place ;You don't want to lose your retired community because they are the least draining on government system;So these are the two populations you want to protect.;The bond needs a plan - should offer free mental health care for seniors, etc.; housing changes for seniors are incredibly stressful, they need social aspect to be successful;Neighborhood design is very important for the elderly = > can the city put together a volunteer commission check in on people, have their backs;Aging population: ability to live in a complete community.  not just a nursing home. Make sure that continuing care facilities are in communities that people don't have to leave;good way for neighborhoods to stick together; aging in place. Needs city and county to allow and promote.;Durham's population is aging - 75% of owners are seniors;Durham to become an age friendly - access to bus, healthcare. Don't forget about services.;An ideal Durham includes free or low cost transportation for disabled and older adults that gets them efficiently and quickly to grocery stores and other key locations like Durham Center for Senior Life;"Tsunami of old people" - need to deal with aging and disabilities in a new way;Seniors need more attention. Sidewalks and bus service;"age in place";an ideal Durham takes care of its most vulnerable populations;Focus on person not zip code example: tax relief for those that need it;services for people on an as needed basis;Focus on person, not zip code - property taxes based on income - people on fixed income can freeze it - easy access to food and programs for a comfortable life ex) shuttles to hospital;More support is needed - mental services. Especially for Latino women facing domestic violence.;Organizations who offer support have long waiting lists to provide support. Is there a way to incentivize private organizations or support non-profits to provide more support?;Environmental upbringing impacts outcomes in adulthood-target resources appropriately;Better accessible social service provision near the places that people who need them to live;Better connections to services. ;Solar chargers on every corner;Eliminate rules against solar;More solar panels of optional power systems - decentralized;City of Durham can fight Duke Energy by eliminating rules against solar. Join with other cities to fight together;compost pick up at curb;City compost service;Energy Efficient homes for rental properties ;Energy renewable, potential in DPS. DPS  - the extent to which Council is lobbying state legislature (rent control, schools) fighting at this level. ;Greater community engagement with sustainability and city and county staff for it;Development is equitable and planned with climate change in mind (knowing climate change affects the most vulnerable);Equity-climate resources;planning for climate change and planning for food security. sustainable development;Environmentally sensitive development - required recycling service for development;Climate change - health related;planning for climate change for a sustainable development: plan for business and mixed use. and land for gardening;global warming-transportation;Incorporate electric buses ;Amenities like trees to reactive to climate change;plant more trees-community solar (make green energy affordable);Sustainable and responsive to climate change; limit excessive carbon emissions. Ways to get around without car. Lots of parking lots. Dangerous getting around on foot sometimes. ;sustainability; focusing on water quality issues; environmental sustainability that is viable for future generations - storm water management controls. Reducing the amount of pollutants, debris, impervious surfaces.;Incorporate a green new deal - comprehensive local version, construction projects.;Plastic bag ban; Single use plastic for commercial; stop killing the trees, tree inventory policy that is consistent to sustainability. Protected tree zones. Regulations around the types of trees with sensible placement in relationship to the side and type of lots, development;More attention to climate change and sustainable infrastructure;Solar Panels everywhere led by City and based on income gathering done by Durham workers;Support and incentivize solar panels installation on houses and small businesses;air pollution worries;have regulations to require trees and storm water protection;I like to see city support for solar panels - everywhere! - city could help with this!;solar panels;I'd love to have some climate environmental standards, appearance standards, for new development.;Inclusivity and Climate;Environment;Environment - there's a ton of trash everywhere. We send our trash to a rural, black county. Walk along the end, it's filled with trash. We have to do better;On climate, development, making things bike, pedestrian, transit forward;Thinking about new people coming in how we can make it…You know climate change is here, people on the margins will feel it. Farmers, homeless.;Climate neutral. Design standards. Transportation that we provide;Presentation on tree preservation. Things that are being done in the new Durham have impacts. Some positive;Trees are so important. Store carbon, mitigate heat, make people feel better.;Concerned about water run off for all new development;Climate crisis is a concern. Reduce use of fossil fuels no fossil fuels used;climate change - its getting hotter in certain neighborhoods;renewable energy ;Duke energy should change their way of thinking ;keep our water and air clean ;climate change - building a more resilient city - prepared for storm events - better storm water treatment practices - mitigated impacts on low-income communities  ;green energy - solar, more accessible recycling, community gardens;Using trash to produce energy;SDGs;Climate resiliency;Use sustainable development goals. UN Goals;Population growth and waste management.  more to zero waste community currently sending landfill 97 miles away.;Ideal Durham lives in harmony with nature. Needs to be sustainable for all populations;Transit; creating a zero-waste, climate resilient city. Importance of air quality. Transit can help.;Cutting carbon emissions by in half by 2030, completely by 2050 - city has adopted a policy;Retrofitting energy efficient buildings and waste;Our land use plan has focused on protection on watershed and drinking water;Reducing carbon emissions…robust transit, localization getting more of what you need closer to home;Retrofitting Buildings to be energy efficient - (land use and transit);Water conservation how can we preserve;Clean Environment;Our planet is changing for the worse;The things we are doing are affecting the weather and climate;How climate change and weather impact people living;Eastgate, Crabtree, other homes are flooding;Balance of green guidelines without scaring away growth ;Answer the question "how green should it be?";Localized environmental protections not we dependent on federal level regulations;Topographically sensitive land use decisions;No more clear-cutting of timber and tree preservation;Knowledge on what can we do locally and personally?;Getting communities and companies to become environmentally responsible;Reduced air pollution;More and more development impacting drinking water.;Environmental sustainability-indoor environmental-green standards continue to improve are only marginally more expensive and have long-term operational savings. include solar and battery storage; make green standards part of code; talk with Duke to allow city to generate and purchase renewable energy;Environmental study - streams and developers;Global warming then Transportation;be bird friendly: rig cages on chimneys have contributed to the demise of chimney swallows;Environmental  and  storm water concerns;Reducing carbon footprint. New development needs to impact that. Trees, cars.;Green construction for public facilities. New schools, solar panels.;Public schools and libraries should focus on sustainability.;Clean air, clean water.;Having housing be more sustainable with lots of green space.;Ideal Durham - trash and waste from construction sites. Same way of dealing with it,  reclaimed - consider.;Solar panels on roofs;future Durham: clean air, clean water;future Durham: sustainability promoted in public institutions (ex. schools, libraries);climate change-sustainable development patterns;citywide composting and recycling every week;Curbside composting;Go carbon neutral downtown. The future is not more cars and roads. Roads diets work.;Address climate issues locally.;Incentive to residents to reduce storm water. Smaller lawn, more planting, etc. ;Developers must respect buffers along waterways.;Give citizens incentives for arranging storm rain on their property.;Compost curbside service.;Sustainable climate change ready, car free, everyone is housed. ;30 billion birds gone.;Very important to this table: 100% Greenhouse gas neutral-more easily accessible solar, energy sustainability, renewable energy, how we build our city. We're forcing people to drive to areas, use  more resources. Grey Water Infrastructure "reused water";Durham should be a good example of a city that uses renewable energy;Adaption to climate change ;Decreasing carbon footprint impact of climate changes, ;consider the Paris agreement and decisions that are low-to-no impact re: carbon dioxide;Climate change--resilient;Planning for solar and climate change?;Reducing industry, factory pollution; reduce personal vehicle usage, reduce plastics production and poor agricultural practices;Prepared for climate change and protecting citizens;Alternate electricity choices;Ideal Durham: being a climate change leader;ban plastics!!-affordable energy efficient houses;powering city and county infrastructure through green energy;be progressive in climate change problem;Consider the environment, flooding, forest preservation, climate change, a lot of ideas park and rec offers already - raise awareness. Teen night;Natural yards initiative;How sustainably functions. Who gets access? Employment their experience incentives;Circuit breaker Property tax structure to cap property taxes based on income while increasing revenue for city services;Circuit breaker policy on property tax to allow greater revenue;my family has worked on land in Durham for years. tax percentages are not fair. Taxing every 4 years is a way to put it out;My personal housing problem is that my house is in disrepair and I cannot refinance to make the necessary repairs because of the City's 2nd mortgage program will not allow subordination of my first-time homebuyer's no interest loan. While the city does not lose anything in fixing up my property, I am being punished for being a faithful taxpayer. The City and County continue to increase my annual property taxes, appreciates the value of my home to suite THE PLAN and I get to live in a raggedy affordable house. ;tax dollars should be used for home improvements for citizens in need;Property tax affect affordable housing.;Large corporations to keep tax rate low and support tax base;Corporate social responsibility-cap on property taxes-impacts affordability. quit raising taxes, can't keep paying more;Farmers - land should be taxed not for housing so they can stay;Stopping the dissolutions of low-income communities due to increased property values and taxes;Taxes and Durham's fiscal responsibility: I'd like to see the line item budget for the $95M. I'd like to see the bonds the City of Durham and the County of Durham has acquired in the last 25 years. I'd like to see the tax revenue and assessments of the last 25 years. Taxes keep a low-income household on the edge of survival. Taxes on your phone, on your cable, on your car, on your house, on food, on gas, your income, and everything you need to live. I want to know what the heck is the government doing with all my tax dollars. Sitting up in your suburban mini-mansion not passing the NC State budget that's what. I am on a quest to understand why the taxes in Durham are so high. In 2016, the appraised tax value on the 2016 Honda CRV I was leasing was $17,630. In 2017, it was $18,070. How does the value of a leased vehicle appreciate $440?;taxes not increased until city looks at issues that are causing landlord and tenant negotiations;Tax increases are affecting senior homeowners  and  major appreciation in valuation happened abruptly  and  some saw major decreases in valuation;Zip codes appear to dictate tax values, residential areas near RTP seeing major tax increases;Property values appear to vary at random, but all are going up, up, up.;Property tax forgiveness  and  increase freeze for low income homeowners.;Reliance on (primarily) property taxes will continue to reinforce gentrification.;CA froze property taxes Prop 18 as a solution, helping with  tax increase (statewide law);High and rising taxes - don’t want tax changes to impact long-term residents;I'll tell you something my neighbors said in connection with  Housing Bond: Taxes have gone way up. She's retired. She thought she'd have enough, but she may be forced out.;I don't know how they think. They know what a house is worth.;What happened in Chapel Hill could happen here with taxes, and you get voted out.;Historic districts: get rid of them all. It's property tax protection for a select few. (The Angier  and  Driver area): This created a problem for Affordable Housing, because Durham Reserve Mission wanted to build A.H., but they couldn't.;All of downtown should be a tax increment district to pay for all the things that are needed to support D.T.;Unclear if Durham has high tax rates - perception that it's high. If it is high, why?;property taxes can be a problem too;Costs of living increases and tax increases;Taxes not increased until city looks at issues they are causing;decreasing tax base for seniors and as you age;Valuations by neighborhood very different then put rationale out;Tax valuations need to transparent, explained, balanced, equitable;Tiered property tax structures  and  equity;Affordable taxes;Need tax relief for gentrifying neighborhood.;Property tax relief is needed to reduce gentrification. Help people with fixed income. We have some tools but could do more. ;Freezing property taxes 65 and over opt in - people have to know about it and it's not automatic. People don't know about this option. We need a lot more of this to let people stay here.;Way of raising property tax. ;land value taxes could help;regressive land tax appraisal system-not good and worse than a flat tax, probably not great, break up lots into smaller lots;more progressive property tax structure;taxes are driving people from Durham;Create tax (sales) for affordable housing, daycare, healthcare.;safer for ADA and families to use the transit stops;More and more people with disabilities are active;Still need access van for disabled;improve flexibility of transportation including in low income neighborhoods;Transit that leverages future-state technologies (self driving, electronic, connected vehicles that can adjust routes on "users" calls via smartphone app) ;need access to parks through  means of transit;Future transportation modes and historic preservation. ;Better transit and housing ;No longer driving cars - transit use - different road system;Walking  and  hiking  and  recreation trails  and  designated areas, clean residential water, better internet without monopoly pricing;no scooters;multi modal (bike, walk, car, and bus);GoTriangle sponsored uber initiative-on demand;Ideal is on-demand (a lot of people have phones) door to door.;People with  special needs - access, safety to transportation then could be better with  efficiency. ;Ideal day: walk (or bike) out door and follow creek to falls lake through parks connected greenways. Driving to work in outskirts of downtown with nearby lunch options and go to gym and nightlife - not necessarily a bar. Access to a park anytime. Attending farmers market. More cemented greenways and green spaces to hike and walk. Mess around on the farm and stay in the woods and  enjoy the peace and engaging wildlife. Maintained critical watersheds. Drum circles - hip hop nights - more active opportunities - what is the culture of Durham and how do we protect and enhance it. Durham Central Park - more spaces like it and active programming and music options ;Ought to be alternatives to driving, but light rail wasn't it. One grocery store on line (whole foods). Didn’t go where it needed to go. Bus service here. Penalizes the poor. Bus comes once every hour. Not can this idiotic talk about equity for poor people if you're not going to do anything about it. We're written up in the NY times as racially segregated. ;Flexible transit system e.g. populated regional system;a better way to get to the airport;use uber and lyft for transit in Counties;ideal Durham: where people can easily and affordably travel around the city and to Chapel Hill, Raleigh;Transportation - people should feel safe using transit to get them to the places they need to go;watch the roads and schools!;Senior Transit in the inner-city - golf carts for seniors on belt line trail;we need supplemental transportation;Transportation that's run on re-usable energy would drive down cost of travelling through the City. Could possibly be free to residents);an ideal Durham: transportation for everyone. uses transit but we are not on equal footing. more electric. concerned about the environment, must be concerned about climate changing;Folks want more transit options;We need trolleys-other cities (like Ft. Lauderdale) have them and they're free-can accommodate seniors or anyone who doesn't have access to transportation. in trolleys, you can go a lot of places-beach, store, etc.;remove all one-way streets;one where traffic is less congested;traffic congestion;Integrated - multi modal bike and pedestrian Forward;Also integration of services not just bike and pedestrian friendly, but bike and pedestrian forward;Connect Access (Transit) with housing, schools, destinations;Too much traffic;connect with  transportation;Building this model around transit stops;get rid of Morgan st downtown loop;One where we can design transit first mobility then land use;Create good transit (technology=> micro mobility) designing cities around moving people;Solution land use and transportation and $;Working class pop needs transit;transit to major hubs ;The strip along Highway 54 and  Highway 55: there's an opportunity there. A transportation hub there maybe.;This table strongly disagreed with the shareout comment "design your transit system first";If it takes more than twice the time to take public transit? I'll take a car.;Scooters are on busy streets;access to public transit for all (Not just Duke);incentivized public transportation, included North Durham;Bold transit plans no cars needed!;Better public transit;More bike lanes; bus only lanes.  more focus on crosstown travel;Being able to get from one end of Durham to another. Possibly a highway;Connectivity;Robust transit, localization (things and locations closer to home);Getting more people on transit;Improving zoning to help influence transit and alternate methods of transportation;Transit between cities is better than transit within the city;Multicentric - try not to focus too much downtown. A lot of focus on urban tier. Focus on mixed-use communities. Focus on suburban tier - is where most the issues are;751 Durham development should not be happening;Where are we going to focus these transportation hubs;See fewer self-contained subdivisions. More sidewalks, regional transit in other new neighborhoods.;Places like Atlanta, with more chaotic infrastructure, still figured out transit;Influences in carpooling, dedicated lanes, biking;4% of DOT funding is in bus, sidewalks, bikeways, etc. Too much into road, vehicle focus.;Transit plan - getting to low density areas.;would like to see fewer subdivisions that are self contained. Incorporating transit plans in every single development. Require developers to build a bus shelter;decentralizing transit hubs;Start trying and piloting transit before we get the funds.;Pedestrian and walking and biking - more protective bike lanes;more funding for transit that are already in place.;Get from one end to the other end of Durham easier and with the least amount of trouble. Alternative routes and connectivity.;Promoting zoning regulations - investing in transit;more options in transit;Traffic from change;Trains and traffic;Self driving cars? Change the way that roads are build, the way the city.;Through-traffic going through neighborhoods.;RDU connection - would like shuttle bus between downtown and RDU or the transit hub.;Buses not enough options. Easy train connection from Durham and Raleigh.;Area is rapidly being developed. Traffic is increasing.;Traffic calming hard to see in the dark. No reflective paint on them.;If we could get a light-rail. Bus options. Bus takes a whole hour.;Needs to be more transportation facilities for all people to increase connectivity and accessibility, include covered pedestrian bridges and underground transportation networks;Transit Website and App;Weather makes taking transit tough;Alternatives to driving! Riding sharing options, better busing, para transit;Transit plan should be separate;Accessible transportation  and  communication;Traffic Impacts;Needs better transit, especially for visually impaired;poor transit;took 2 hours to get from Chapel Hill to Durham;Access very used to take one person at a time - grouped together has been much better;Subsidize up to $ 10 for public transit service.;Transportation services needed for older generation.;hope too much emphasis isn't on biking or walking. Need mass transit;Having public transportation would be more helpful;Public transportation should go north of Horton Rd;Expand bus routes;If you're going to have transit, there needs to be access maybe park and ride;bus stops not safe no protection from speeding vehicles;Diamond Crosswalks are a problem on the corner. Unsafe;Augusta Georgia had better crossing for visually impaired. Labeled street name via sound;Would have regional transit;Improve and expand access (Go Durham Access Service);Development oriented transportation - to move sub-urbanize nodes - development where communities and business hubs are;Easy to park, bike, walk, transit - connected neighborhood - more transit access in neighborhood.;Improved and increased transportation with seniors in mind (wants to get off cars);Mini vans that can enter smaller streets and neighborhoods and bring people into to bigger transit system.;Difference between development oriented transportation vs transportation oriented development ;Outer city more connected to downtown;Pass through traffic is deviated from Roxboro Rd.  should it happen by building new highways?;Park-And-Rides with services and store in North Durham;Bus stops - sidewalks;Roxboro Rd.  East end connection public transport N. Durham;Address transportation needs of older adults ;Transportation hubs North Durham park and rides;Collection points;Transportation;accommodate multiple forms of transportation;easy to travel without a car;an ideal Durham: accommodates people aging out of driving, affordable driverless cars, bus shelters;accessibility improvements-bike paths, multi use paths, sidewalks, funded by transit;roads make it tough for the transit system downtown. one way streets is a problem;transportation around region is tough;lack of walkability and bikeability;housing is directly tied to transit-not transit or development first; do it together;complete transit infrastructure system;equality of resources affordable transportation around triangle;bikeability and walkability Hillsborough and Cole mill;Change then transit for youth;Transit doesn't work. People don't know how to plan ahead well.;Encourage groups who provide "group transit" to provide it more often to others;Traffic congestion and expanding transit opportunities in surrounding neighborhoods in Durham;Subsidize transit routes;Have more access to transit;Walking and biking;Who is the community prioritizing? People or vehicles?;Transit;Better ways to get people places;How do people from Durham get to free museums in Raleigh (art, etc.) other cultural resources in area. ;Lack regional connectivity;Fare-free triangle;Use public transit in other cities but do not use it here. Unlimited fares in NYC, DC is distance based or only good for modality, customer service and accessibility within stations. ;What are trip limits - senior, single day, passbooks? ;Durham needs greater connectivity and more access to regional resources with greater fare options;Regional connectivity, accessibility, complete network;Getting around;Efficiency of transit.;What I don't like: Lack of public transportation.;Bike and pedestrian areas on 2 lane roads.;Public transport to airport.;Easy way to get or park downtown.;Congestion at times on  MLK.;Traffic congestion. Cars are the only way to get around. Don't want to go downtown. ;Neighborhood based future. Neighborhood context development. Neighborhood oriented development. Metro system help organize that. Zoning might be able to deal with that. Make sure there are transit options. ;Could bike and walk more;Transit routes increased to reach more areas of Durham.;Fare free transit to reduce auto traffic.;Want alternative to in-town transportation other than driveway.;We need something that's a lot more flexible to reach lots of routes and separate lanes. It takes 1 hour on a bus for 10 minute car trip.  ;Meandering streets and can't take a city bus to school. More infrastructure (sidewalks) to get around. ;AV would be novel form of public transit because it can take you anywhere . Very flexible but still have reservations.;Thinking about Queens were the subway doesn't go everywhere but you have consistent and frequent bus  and  shuttle services. ;Interest in reaching all neighborhoods.;If we don't start addressing this, we can't reach our potential in Durham.;Commute from my house to Duke is 25 minutes  and  5 miles.;Public transportation.;Where people can easily and affordability travel around the city and to Chapel Hill, Raleigh.;More transit hubs outside of downtown (brier creek, south Durham);Off-street parking then better bus service;More reasonable transit to RTP and airport (needs to be earlier and later);Durham 2030: free public transportation;future Durham: auto reign of terror is over: shared transit, bicycles, scooter, walking take precedent;future Durham: quick, intuitive public transportation, less traffic;get rid of relic of 70's downtown loop;less driveway access points on major collectors;train tracks downtown create barriers;less one-way streets in general-more neighborhood streets: slower traffic, move away from moving people via cars in and out to suburbs and back;no one goes somewhere because it has awesome downtown parking;don't get rid of loop, it's Durham's belt: create more of a boulevard, slow people down, create active space, utilize the rows from train;On the transit piece, if we could have transit that let livable space expand outside the core;We need a much more open process for transit planning- both Go Triangle and the MPO announce what they are doing, and only then solicit public input. This was true of the old and seems to be true of new plans. ;More stop on train between Durham and Raleigh;In Switzerland, lots of public transit and hiking - hiking classes.;Good transit is an equalizer.;Transit needs to be closely coordinated with neighboring cities  and  counties. Lots of folks live=>work across city limits;I see people biking with groceries. It must be hard, especially with a family.;better Amtrak  and  bus station ;Fewer cars! Less traffic! Less congestion;Commuting in Durham -  Lived in other places with public transit options. Durham is not like other cities. 0 grid light rail would still pose barriers for a lot of people. Would require LRT and other innovations.;transportation accessible to all reasonable growth;future Durham: there will be barely any cars and everyone will bike, walk or take the bus;less parking lot space;fewer cars aesthetic;overabundance of parking garages downtown;Better trails and sidewalks - awesome bus system - free system, user friendly app for transit. Discount for kids.;Maintain quality of community ; Housing - Expand transit;The traffic on the streets: the streets cannot handle the number of cars on the roads;Streets with potholes;Transportation being improved with a large new item;community rides;like about transit in Durham and Downtown: benefits of big city, world class entertainment;Bikes, scooters, not everyone can $ or use;Keeping bike lanes clear with more cleaning;Bike stations in more places than just hot spots;When new Main St. bike lanes end actually made it terribly unsafe. I wish someone who biked was part of the planning.;Pedestrian friendly and bike friendly - more awareness for safety, especially downtown;concern: biker safety. biking is scary, even in existing bike lanes;There's not a safe way to bike from our neighborhood to downtown. Since Pettigrew closed, there is not a safe way. I heard about bike corridors in downtown and it seems like that might work.;The greenways are awesome--I often get into my car to go to a bike path. Sometimes it feels unsafe when navigating pathways with cars. It's scary. An angry driver will sometimes try to run you off.;Need better bike and sidewalk connectivity;Continue to increase options for biking  and  walking that are separate  and  safe from cars;Would like to see more sidewalks and bike lanes, particularly on busy corridors. The lack of these facilities forces pedestrians  and bikes into the street, which is unsafe and can back up traffic.;pedestrian and bike forward;get people out their cars to more bike and pedestrian transit;The bike lanes ;Keep adding bike lanes;Bike lanes added as roads are resurfaced;Share bikes - docked;On-street bike lanes are not safe;University dr bike lanes work for experienced cyclists, but not others;Bike facilities should be off street (bicycle highways!);Separated lanes;no more bike lanes to nowhere-more connectedness;Would like bikeable Durham.;Bike Lanes need to be wider and longer.;Bicycle boulevards. ;More Bus Stop penetration in surrounding neighborhoods;Benches, shelters, and lights at bus stops;State of Art Bus System with great service and infrastructure - i.e. Chapel Hill;there should be a bike license;I don't want to ride my bike on the roads;Bike paths turn city to suburbs;Bike lanes are too narrow;More bike lanes  and  bike trails ;Unsafe bike paths and lack of connections;Bike lanes: hard to go places other than downtown on bike trail to get across Durham.;Protected bike lanes;Parking gets tough when you get to downtown especially in popular times; bike share program in New Orleans was great. Kiosks - easy learning curve, easy to adapt;Inconsistent bicycle routes - start  and  stop without warning.;Biking is very dangerous.;Protected bike lanes or a car free zone.;Improved safety for bicycles and pedestrians. Lower volume of car traffic would help.;Protected bike lanes.;Driver knowledge of bike lanes versus passing.;Dedicated bike lanes. Physically separated  and  protected. ;The current bike lanes don't feel safe without being separated. ;Drivers need education on new bike lanes.;751 between Duke and 70 - need a bike lane there. It's forest on both sides. It would be easy to make bike lanes there. ;Transit network access bike lanes - need lot more Hope valley Road versus 9th Street groceries, restaurants on foot and by bus.;The bus in Durham needs to be free. Free passes for students but not advertised well. ;Develop routes where buses can get around the city easier;Reliable transportation; safe, punctual, coordinated routes;BRT in South America with its own land--it's just as good as rail.;Transit - from Walltown. Needs more bus stops ;Bus shelters that actually provide shelter. Solar lights on shelters;More transit stops and more frequent stops and live updates;bus rapid transit with expanded routes;Half of bus trips fail-get to bus stop and bus is already gone. unreliable. Doesn't wait. needs to come more than every 30 minutes. One bus can be too early and next bus that you have to wait for is 20 minutes late. people won't ride the bus (if they have a car) if the bus is unreliable. carbon footprint won't be reduced;bus needs to run every 10-15 minutes. frequency need to  be increased in areas of Durham that has a lot of ridership;E. Main St. will start running every 15 minutes;Projects like benches and covers at bus stops - combination of volunteers, private business and government funding.;Dignified and frequent transit network used by everyone;Mass transit for employees and patients to get to Duke and VA medical;Busing stock should all be electrified;where is Durham with electric buses? VW is also set to manufacture electric microbuses;inequity between bus services;Chapel hills buses are free which is good and the phone app is helpful for scheduling (can check wait time) ;Free fare greatly affects ridership and equity if want fewer cars need more buses and cheaper ;Bull City connector line - reconsider and keep (?) and do u/s free line;BCC-E and W N and S;Lincoln on free line;kids used Bull City Connector-helped to increase equity;Free transit, regional system, work on weekends;The bus should come at least every 1/2 hour.  ;24 hours bus system to regional hubs like Duke Hospital;Frequent busing routes and stops ;Efficient busing with frequent routes especially in North Durham, Old East Durham, Walltown, West Durham, etc. ;Dedicated bus ways with frequent service;Bus Rapid Transit in Raleigh - development near transportation;No car then needs to depend on public transp. miss bus have to wait an hour for the next then late then increase frequency;ideal Durham: speed of bus system increased, more buses, "high speed design";cover our bus stops;Kids getting around the City; 10 year old on a bus is good;Robust bus rapid transit, ideally multi hub;Noise levels (traffic). Buses can be made quieter. Noise pollution.;buses could be like uber - on demand;ACCESS and regular transit divided - more on demand service even for buses ;Calling Durham ACCESS is a long process - day or two before the wait is longer. make that process easier - 1 only let my daughter ride because I used to be a GoDurham ambassador and the driver know her;Streamline Durham ACCESS - online on an app;Columbia (NYC), Minneapolis - very little wait time between buses - seamless for people with special needs. Learn from uber and lyft;Go Durham Access need to dedicate up to two hours, it could come as early as 8 am to 10 am since it is a shared ride service it can take too long. Potentially incorporating the on-call demand services for ridiers such as uber and lyft should be incorporated into the overall transit plan. ;Lots more people in neighborhoods mean lots more traffic and cars, potential ridership;Poor have access to bus lines and resources they need;Transit Slow - 3 miles about an hour ride. Wants to see transit be regional rather than transfers between carries and transit systems;No express bus from UNC to Durham is an issue;Regional transportation via bus routes that does not have long commute times ;Regional transit needed ;Efficient regional transit too;Durham to Hillsborough - what can be done? Public transit? ;I like buses and having a train to connect Raleigh, Durham, Chapel Hill, but is's a pain to get over to Raleigh;Small buses - quicker;why do buses have to be so big? could they be smaller?;biodiesel buses;Electric buses. Keep pushing and do more.;Integrated EV buses for schools and public transport, sharing energy;Add more buses - how does that work with cost, emissions, pollution ;In areas of high congestion and traffic have dedicated bus lanes ;Maybe places where congestion is bad, have dedicated bus lanes.;Less congestion everywhere I go. I want people to be able to function effectively in their environment. Not many safe places to bike. Find ways to increase bus routes.;bus is more flexible than a light rail system;Every person have multiple travel options-give people the opportunity to use bus, bike, walk;ideally in 20 years we look like: Transit: multiple options of transit, transit to take less time, transit a more pleasurable experience. people wanting to take transit over their vehicle. Dependable, affordable, and pleasant-Minneapolis has a great mode of public transit. transit more pleasant than driving;More safe places to bike and more bus routes;make streets bike, pedestrian, bus friendly and sidewalks and shelters crosswalks, pedestrian streets;Using parking subsidies to subsidize buses, bike lanes, sidewalks, scary when no sidewalk;better bus system: better walkability to bus stops and stations, better bus stops, reliable buses;I would like to see neighborhoods and public schools, most citizens, using public transit and opportunities for meaningful work in the city;a state of the art bus system with stops with light, seating, shelter, frequent night rides, free rides, ways to bypass traffic.;Improve bus system, make stops more usable;Consider fare-free bus service. ;Build a Bus Rapid Transit system;Please have fare free transit like CHT;free public transit;We need a post light rail regional transit plan. Consider bus rapid transit. Bus stops need to be better marked and include benches and shelters.;Frequency and route options for transit needs to improve. Want to be car free!;Free bus service, $ packed buses;When I first started my job, I didn't have a car, I took the bus. It worked fine in other places, all types of professionals take transit. It would be good to have that here. ;Accessibility - transportation. A lot of people say they want to bike more, walk more, but there are barriers. Or get on a bus, there may be stigma.;I have a car now, didn't always, at a recent apartment, I could walk to grocery. Previously I rented a car to drive to laundromat;Need more shelters for bus stops.;bus shelters and better, safer bus stops ;sidewalks and lighting for bus stops;better and express bus service ;bus rapid transit, bus lanes ;Instead of bigger bus, smaller buses with more routes.;Instead of an hour: routes every 1/2 hour or 20 minutes or 15.;All the buses come downtown: we need depots in all the 4 corners.;Bus is the answer, but we have the wrong bus system.;How about a bus way, like in Pittsburgh or Ottawa.;Babies are not safe on the bus and have to have a car seat in an Uber of Lyft.  could one be integrated into buses?;People in Durham need to use car seats.  safe kids car seats protocol, integrated seats;Making it easier to get to bus stops, give them more amenities; shelters are important;Some stops ae in unsafe locations, Deerborne drive, Roxboro, so many people are just walking down the streets;Bus routes are easy enough to figure out;24/7 bus transportation would help families and provide access for workers - buses don't run late enough. Buses should be free..  Chapel Hill has free transit, why not Durham?;Chapel Hill's system is free and it is so accessible;lack of shelters for transit riders well-lit, protected shelters.;Bus stop near house: but takes too long;Add to hub-spoke system - need more cross town service;Make it as easy to get everywhere to get somewhere by bus  and trolley;transit-only lanes and priority.;make experience. Make it easier to take transit vis a vis driving If not easier then people will not take. Also: equity issue. RN people using have fewer options;Add a shelter at every neighborhood and not a minimum post and bench;Frequency of buses to help people;Decentralizing bus hubs to help influence transfers, preventing people from going out of their way;would love to take a bus Brier creek to Downtown;Frequency with buses vs congestions (congestion free transit);invest more in bus service;Bus shelters;RTP area nice bus stops very close to bad bus-stops;Extension from Durham to Bahama- bus line is needed;Roxboro Rd to Hillandale- bus line is needed;Waiting for the bus is hard when you don't know how long it will take it to get there;Bus service and bus stops  and  hubs;Bus rapid transit would be good;Bus rapid transit;BRT with feeder lines ;Routes could be designed. Buses are more flexible.;more frequent bus service needed and later hours;live half mile outside of city but no bus goes out there; all buses don't have to be huge; connect people in neighborhoods to larger bus lines; more Durham Access vans;More mini-transportation hubs rather than a centralized service to Durham Station only;share at bus stop;loves GoDurham, but need right of way purchases. eg. buses stuck in traffic can use for bus rapid transit. buses have 100% right of way to support rapid transit. being considered for 15/501;GoDurham increase frequency. e.g. 15 minute frequency at night to get there faster and more reliably;Transportation - want to feel safe on the bus and paratransit ;access to public transit for people accessing social services-delayed, underfunded, people riding have low understanding of utilization, for disabled and elderly, paratransit services are weak, not convenient and cancellations, point to point access is not working;Small buses can work. Keep!;2107 Hillandale Rd - bus stops no overhang, no seat, one an hour. DPS staff Development Center needs improvements so and more buses. East Regional Library similar situation;Difficult for people to get around - main library has bus stops but make it a big deal to talk up if provide stops for all libraries;Main places do not have stops near them - how to get to jobs, places, can get to main offices downtown;Have to go to a hub and transfer because lines do not cross and allow easy transfers to get to places;Have to know both lines to know if wanted to talk to another line stop so reconfigure so do cross missed opportunities, not efficient;Make libraries hubs;Have to go to downtown to get energy - time and energy wasted. Downtown loop would be helpful ;Buses too long to get to places.;Buses running down Cornwallis.;All routes should run at least 30 minutes. ;More bus routes serving more of the city.;Bus service should be fare free.;Our bus system should be fast, frequent and free.;Bus is over 30 minutes, not possible, system isn't functional. Add routes, frequency (10 minutes or less) and infrastructure (shelters).;Increase access to bus routes.;Safe and dry bus shelters - get people out of rain and mud (x2);More frequent service, express routes, crosstown service;Crossroads like carver st need bus routes;Small buses ;Everyone within 10 minute walk of bus stops;Every urban school should have public bus that serves each school (merrick-moore);Late night bus service (night sweeper) and for workers;Bus rapid transit (down Erwin rd.?) ;More frequent night service in Durham;free bus service-more effective and affordable and not everyone has cash, pay for it ahead of time;routes are more interconnected-not have to go to transit station to connect;Bus rapid transit will be good if done right, GoTriangle may not be best to do it. 15/501 bus route separated from traffic on fixed routes. Also between here and Raleigh, here and airport.;Bus rapid transit ;More busses;Great if buses ran more often (every 15 minutes) and heard that buses don't go where they need to go. ;Free fare for transit would be good - need more buses  and  electric buses.;More demand response transit.;Express bus.;Free buses -  could consider or free bus areas. Right now the bus doesn't go where you need to go. You have to go through downtown to go anywhere. ;Nearest stop to my house is a 30 minute walk. ;The most vital use for transport is getting to and from work. Hospital is a large employer and school system - those are all over - if we were more deliberate about express routes to those economic areas to densely populated parts of town, could get more cars off the road. ;There should be a downtown Durham to RDU express bus. We might need a dedicated lane so they can go faster than cars.;There should be direct access from Durham to NC Museum of Art. Also to the mall - Centennial Mall where museums are and legislature. ;Need sheltered bus stops. Need to look different from each other. ;Bus services to airport;Bus services - targeted  and  express;Bus line from County to City.;More  and  better bus routes to make it easier to get around.;From NYC - hub of mass transit - the bus stops are not sufficient - no covers, trash cans, lighting, etc. If I'm trying to get a job and it rains that day and the bus is in a dangerous location, I have to go though mud. Disgrace for anyone to sit at a bus in the dirt without a bench. At least a safe, covered area. Safety between the stop and the street. Somewhere for people to rest. ;Since routes are easily accessible.  the seating makes it so that people are looking @ each other causing anxiety;Bus network that people would take by choice - families could be one-car households;Bus system: smaller and more frequent.;Park n Ride on Miami Blvd. to take people to the airport ;Care about public transportation ;Concerns about bus stops = crime is foolish, convenience if more;Bike ride to bus stop then take into shop so perhaps parking lots out in suburbs so can skip bike ride section of commute ;High speed bus system-BRT;hope: better, faster buses to a wider range of places around the triangle;Mass transit between Durham and RTP;Today's location is hard to get to for transit riders (less frequent service on Sundays);Make diesel buses park on outer ring and run EV shuttles to run to them;Transportation: a lot of traffic, need fleet of smaller buses (was told bus drivers are needed, so why not invest in training since jobs are needed);Need more buses;Big buses not being effective ;Rapid bus transportation;Access to jobs via mass transit;Public transportation for students to get to schools;Make transit more attractive;increase access to bus routes;reliable, fast, cheap public transit and flexible;find ways to help people ride buses-services must be frequent;Buses are not consistent;Park and Ride Mile;bull city connector line-reconsider and keep running and do north and south free ride;less hub, more network;line near where you work;More transportation routes (buses);Signs in Spanish of next stops (inside the bus);Could uber and lyft model be replicated by City and County employees people;Not have to have a car;Decrease # of cars downtown would be nice ;Work with Duke to cut down on traffic.;Durham is a very "car" city. Driving on 15-501 and NC 147 can be very frustrating;Traffic has changed--gone up and up and up. Transit...it's like cars vs everything else;Keep large parking lots to a minimum;Traffic ;Traffic congestion;Less congestion - 40 and 147 tend to be congested. Main roads as well. Traffic accidents, fatalities. Maybe need different options, more side roads.;I'm from Miami - hate driving there. If we build more roads, widen them, we might lose the "small town" feel that I like. Need to optimize;Limited public parking spaces;less dependent on cars;parking is inadequate here-but on right track;reduction in reliance on cars;eliminate traffic (through) Downtown;Reliable transportation, less traffic 15/501 takes too long, construction adds traffic;car pool lanes ;No cell phones when driving ;Traffic on Highway 98 gone or mitigated ;Want City to grow, but we need a nice transit system. All the traffic, having transit is key. Last plan, Duke didn’t allow. Absolutely need it. I moved to Briar creek and so much traffic.;Everything is very congested.;Self driving cars;Rely on ride share services- Uber and lyft but this requires financial stability ;Coordinate with private business like Uber  and  Lyft;Uber is cheaper than access van;City should work with Uber  and  Lyft;Cooperation between public  and  private vehicles for transportation;Encourage car pooling;easy to walk, easy to park, easy to bike.  Savannah has free bus routes; Google easy to find routes and consistent pick ups;Traffic congestion.;Transit system is overburdened with cars.;Change traffic congestion.;It would be better not to have more non-car options.;Not as many cars.;Only way to get around Durham is by car. Expensive. Parking space accumulates - it's crap.;Do not need a car in the city. Quality options to get around. Public transportation that's not designed around men. Environmental.  Neighborhood feedback for design.;No more superstreets;Need more parking decks.;Mixed-use decks are needed, ground level required.;Incentivize private transportation - all sorts of vehicles.;More electric car charging stations. ;Parking meters - they don't work right. I don't always like to bring my phone. Giving CC info on my phone is not comfortable. There are better systems. I'm thankful it's free on nights and weekends. ;Parking - taking away lot on 9th Street was terrible. City didn't even talk to merchants. If you want people to come to shop, there has to be parking.;Connectivity between neighborhoods is lacking, forces congestion onto feeder streets.;Car pooling programs! ;Uber, Lyft (checkmark) ;Space carpooling would be good;dedicated turn lanes ;light rail only if Wake is on board;I was sad light rail died. I think Bus Rapid Transit will be cheaper and easier to build.;Need to know exactly what went wrong with DOLRT. Reality based thinking;light rail echoed;Bring back light rail Duke killed it with benefit working poor, didn't want it near Duke; their employees would benefit most;The light rail comeback the one in Charlotte is nice it would benefit poor and working class - it would've benefitted Duke's employees;I lived in Charlotte, there was a light rail to get around. There were places to park for that. People could also bike;Light rail would have been good;Regain confidence after light rail ;To me the light rail didn't make sense.;Light rail was nothing but a real estate play.;Still "sick" from DOLRT failure - community needs an alternative and Regionalism is important but balance it with  residents who need transit around Durham;light rail;Inter-city rail. Better connections To the northeast; Richmond and points north.;Light Rail was an ideal solution that fell apart;Light-Rail state funding was a challenge. State was supposed to bring in money and they changed it. Last minute.;Support commuter rail - feed commuter rail backbone with bus routes; use commuter rail for more regular travel; new report suggest that commuter rail may not be as supported in the future;lack of care on siting of light-rail maintenance facility;How did the light rail get derailed by Duke?;The need for efficient public transportation i.e. light rail, trans, subways, etc. (not buses);Maybe a rail and something else.;Light rail would have been nice;Opponents of light rail too, not right place for it;Some form of electric transportation downtown if have density.;Extended train schedule from Raleigh to Durham (evening hours);Train from Durham to Raleigh - evening hours.;light rail was transportation and development project.;Not going to gut light rail but how do we get more flexible system that is more responsive;Light Rail alternative?;Really disappointed about Duke and Light Rail;What can replace light rail?;Better passenger rail capability between cities;like about transit in Durham and Downtown: small town feel-train station;In a way I'm glad light rail wasn't built. It was a slow train that took too long.;Interactive transportation maps - level of service analysis for transportation needs with maps.;free transportation to bring equity; connect to Chapel Hill;transit can support small businesses ;Minneapolis has a lot of bike lanes, transit, great community engagement, no single family downtown, density and affordable housing around transit hubs. Multi-plex allowed on any residential ;is transit running for white neighborhoods or black neighborhoods?;useful and meaningful things around transit lines like groceries;Better transit for public use. Development planned around transit.;Think about how to build near transit lines, affordable housing, work with large employers;Amtrak to Raleigh is not convenient;More connections through transit (and other modes) to Chapel Hill and the region;Public transportation to RDU;safe and accessible public transportation;Connect transit and pathways for retirement homes and older residents to grocery stores and other shopping and libraries.;Transit-centric city: micro-mobility implementation, affordable housing, schools;Quality Public Transportation in all areas. As growth happens and housing needs change, the need for alternative transit modes increase.;New transit plan that partners better with Duke, RTP, RDU;Need better intercity public transit.;Transit - the last plan was based around a rail - that flopped. We have this whole chain of dense places, but we don't have a plan for transit now - need car alternative.;Need good ways to get to medical appointments. Durham Access too long of rides. Bumpy rides. Limited system. Hard for people to do things on the weekend. ;Enjoy seeing people use scooters. Exciting to see people moving on something besides cars.;More interconnected mass transit, bikes, pedestrians. Safe walking, safe biking.;I hope the transit plan is thoughtful and achievable. Light rail hung on some pretty big things that did not happen.;Mass transit - connect downtown between Raleigh and Durham - serve commuters.;Safe modes of transportation - predictable, transparent, ethical governance.;More development of sidewalks, bike lanes, bus routes. Bike or take bus everyday. Had to move to get to a place where I could safely bike to work. Think more people would walk if this was improved.;Make transit easy - bus, bike, walk;Connectivity small and wide - transit, bike, walk, better;Transit - complete multimodal network safety emphasis.;Safe transportation everywhere.;public transit back and forth to work (in-town);Transportation that is accessible and plentiful.;New and better public transportation options; comparing to Atlanta;All residents have reasonable access to public transit;Durham for everyone - not just a separation of have and have nots  - people who don't own are being pushed out;Being conscious of "been here's" and "just got here's" equally;Framework: two Durhams, but maybe 3 Durhams;Old, new and generational;Rich, poor;Disconnect between younger generation and older generation;Wishes there were better communication groups;not divided;City within city;Places where you don't have to drive everywhere--safer bike lanes, slower, speed limits, COMPLETE STREETS;Make these other business districts seem walkable (small neighborhood business districts) Having a grocery store, restaurants-don't have to drive across town to get to. Also have a sweet treat, like bakery or ice cream. Some good examples: Co-op has $3 Thursday dinners and music, so anyone can go there. We like Grub and Joe Van Gogh;I like walking to work and building community with local businesses and people around that;Durham needs to be more connected (sidewalks, greenways, safe roads);Durham has spread out "happening spots". hard to walk or bike between them;Main St should be pedestrian and interactive;where everyone lives in a stable, walkable area and all people have meaningful and real participation.;Brier Creek has everything-movies, ATM, restaurant, coffee. look at what they have to offer and bring those to Durham. Have everything where you can park the car once and spend the day;Citizen who is blind need more opportunities for mobility. Greater access to pedestrian mobility; more bus shelters; ADA access, bus stop access regarding crossing ability; walkable access to bus stops; trash cans next to bus stops, solar compactors at stops would be feasible;future Durham: sidewalks, more tree-lined streets;Neighborhood walkable amenities such as grocery, pharmacy, and restaurants;safe bike paths and lanes, sidewalks, crosswalks-increased walkability;Safer intersections for pedestrians - no right on red;walker safety...lack of integrated sidewalk system. having safe bus stops. make it better to use transit;More sidewalks. Better street crossings. Curb cuts at corners. More ramps. A plan that addresses lack of pedestrian connections. Up-and-over connections over highways;Walking trails within reasonable distance from homes;More sidewalks providing ways for people to get where they need to go; bike lanes, sidewalks, sustainability, pedestrian services;a good walking or biking route-a protected bike lane would be great. ;an ideal Durham: ability to bike and walk all over downtown without potholes;Ideally we could walk or bike to places in a reasonable distance. ;DMV-updates on bike and pedestrian safety when license are renewed;Walkable, bikeable city;It would be good to have technology to call out problems in walking and biking;Bicycle and pedestrian safety ;Intersections in Durham--need buttons to alert stoplights that bikers and walkers could use;Fayetteville Rd, 751 need more sidewalks faster bus routes;More crosswalks, more bus;Multimodal - make it easy to bike, walk, push a stroller;Youth mobility - Crosswalks ; sidewalk connectivity. Speed of cars (25 mph) - safe walking nodes to bus stops;Need sidewalks on Cook Rd!;I love that they're putting sidewalks everywhere.;sidewalks;Accessibility - transportation and disabilities, walk to groceries, foundation of core thing;Also people who want to walk, for health or environmental reasons.;Cross-walk busy roads;Needs more sidewalks, dangerous walking for kids currently near Southpoint, dense development;N. Roxboro near club Blvd. should be more pedestrian ;Braggtown needs overhead crosswalk over 15/501;walk to work;They've got this "cute" walkable city idea, but no one can walk there. They've created this fake Disneyland. ;Rural communities need sidewalks, crosswalks;More sidewalks;More sidewalks, people have to walk to a bus with no sidewalks to get to that stop;We don't have enough sidewalks;Sidewalk quality and connectivity;Sidewalks could be better. Strollers and wheelchairs. 15-501 - University. Could go safely along puddles and cracks. N Gregson. City planted trees.;Trees are blocking sidewalks. Sidewalks are disconnected, fragmented. Impassible. Hard to move through. Joggers runners have difficulty moving on them.;Sidewalks;As Durham grows, we need sidewalks;Walking for access and it's so healthy for us;Drivers would be more cognizant of pedestrian safety pedestrians would have right of way;Connected neighborhoods - extended sidewalks  and  trails that connect;More seamless sidewalks in downtown for walkability (less gas stations);More sidewalks, particularly 1) close to new development to encourage walkability 2) in former "rural areas" 3) at bus stops;Roxboro Rd. Sidewalks!;concern: walker safety. few continuous sidewalks, even near downtown;hope: pedestrian streets;relaxing, walking to everything;More walkable neighborhoods;Increased accessibility for pedestrians;Walkable neighborhoods, cars limited to perimeter, like neighborhoods in Europe. More eco designated areas;Increase accessibility for pedestrians;walkable, slowed down pace;Durham should be a leader. more walkable urban areas. now focused on downtown. other places are really walkable, not necessarily in the city limits;more connectivity between walking areas;walkable communities;walkability! sidewalks and greenways and separation from heavy traffic areas;1.5 miles is walkable;Sidewalks ;Keep repairing sidewalks;Walkable ;More walkable paths in changing communities ;Pedestrian safety audit?;Unified sidewalk network within City limits;Walking ground;Walkability;Walkable neighborhood.;Walkability - more closed streets downtown.;More sidewalks.;Walkable neighborhood.;walkable;Lack of sidewalks in neighborhoods.;Everything seems like a good distance from home, I can walk, I can get somewhere if I have to.;Adding sidewalks and making pedestrians more visible. Make it possible to have places where people can walk, like downtown.;Making stops along walking routes - more walkable Durham designing for elderly and resting space - benches.  Cigarette butts.;Missing  and  connecting sidewalks with a neighborhood - makes a community;Walkable neighborhood.;More pedestrian bridges  and  connections. An art experience. ;increased walkability;Safe paths  and  lanes, sidewalks, crosswalks - increased walkability.;Sidewalk system is deplorable;Much more walkable;Pedestrian signals don't last long enough (Alston ave), especially for elderly;Cars can turn into you even with pedestrian signal;Leading pedestrian intervals (more of these);No turns allowed when people are crossing;Areas around Duke University need to be more walkable;More crosswalks and better marked ;sidewalks suddenly stop and no walkability, especially on the fringe;pedestrians can't engage with busy streets;more destinations to walk to (especially Northgate Park)-more useful commercial development;Old 5 points-good corridor for walkable destination development;Sidewalks: Maintenance not same in all areas;More people are walking;Want more sidewalks;More city funded sidewalk projects, crosswalks and road upgrades;Want more connectivity, connect existing areas of sidewalks;Get more people walking;Sidewalks in downtown and surrounding to create vibrant city area.;Walkable, much less sprawl and car driven. Density is the push but everyone still has 2 cars. If build density, people need to be able to work where they live. Alternative transportation that is human scaled.;It's hard to walk downtown now.;Sidewalks - they're cruddy - dangerous. A very serious problem.;If you expect people to use buses, strollers, grocery shopping, need a level sidewalk.;Transportation- pedestrian oriented activity and land use plan based on these behaviors. Where do we want people to slow down or enjoy? Ex) 15-501 where Fosters and Guglehupf is. Think about activities in an area and prioritize that first, not driving though quickly first.;Super blocks so see Barcelona City Planning;Modernized building code to address water needs ;Resiliency in flooding and emergency travel;Page rd., TW Alexander, US 70 used to be fields now lots of apartment complexes, megachurches, movie theater, several more megachurches within 1 mile of each other. Should have said only single family residential or apartments, not churches. Commissions ignored concerns when brought up. Zoning issue. Impervious surface causing flooding, loss of greenspace. Roads took 15 years to get resurfaced, speed limit is too fast and unsafe. Increase standards to control storm water control issues;clean water, accessibility to potable water;Keeping the Eno Clean--it is such an amazing resource;Need better storm water policies.;Modernized building code to address water needs;Water sources-allocating water sources, Durham is the "smaller sibling" in drawing resources. The Haw River is 30% wastewater;Public water safety - no lead in water, no repeat Michigan.;clean water ;More work opportunities for people who are being left out right now. I'd like to involve the citizenry with arts, academy high tech.;The economy is not my forte not everyone is college material; maybe having apprenticeship programs that assist folks to get everyday jobs and trades and etc.;Economic Development is focused on the family and workers, not corporations. use incentives and intentional to attract responsible companies like COOPs. Employers with a broad spectrum of employees. focusing on median wages. find employers with a diverse wage and incentives. Less bi-modal employment. tearing down the model of areas like RTP;Work for young people, to build their self esteem.;Duke should be pushed to provide a living wage.;Economy is hot, but will eventually a recession. Impacts lowest income the most. Need to focus on job development. Recession will hit the lowest income people the hardest.;Jobs - equal pay for people of color;Top 3 themes:;1. Businesses and industry (employers) have civic accountability and responsibility to pay a living wage.;2. Affordable housing (plus the relationship with depressed incomes) creative housing with grants for willing home owners with financial need;3. Walkability, health communities and livability, public transportation, green space, parks and rec space.;living wage (do not incentivize otherwise);Durham as a leader (not business incentives) Durham businesses, job creation for middle and low-income residents. take care of residents first, job training centers for locals;Durham is not an economic power house - significant number of people are in poverty. I wish I could get someone here who could employ another 4K people - not just encouraging small entrepreneurs. ;an ideal Durham: access to jobs, education and social services. if we don't start now won't have sustainable growth;why don't businesses have vans for their workers or subsidize buses;transportation is a primary challenge in reaching work and opportunities;Incentivize industries and businesses to hire local workforce.;Local business incentives to hire more people;More opportunities to make a living wage;micro biz teens , jobs for all;Provide jobs for everyone who is looking for one;Minimum $15 an hour job would be ideal ;Jobs we have are not matching with  skills; need job training for locals;Job opportunities who don’t have formal training and education ;The people going door-to-door for money: Isn't there something more useful they could be doing? An employment plan. They don't all need education.;Job training going after Youth;We have great jobs in Durham for all levels of education and our community isn't aware of.;Keep residents working in Durham;Job "Draft Days" for our youth to encourage young employees and young growth;High School Job Fairs;Celebrate working class (i.e. football draft);Like Durham living wage project. City and County could do more to only use vendors that pay living wage. Hasn't been a priority;We need jobs with a livable wage;can't get a good job in Durham;greed city because anybody can make money. ;training for local jobs;jobs for non-advanced degrees;Jobs for all economic development.;More opportunities to learn a skill rather than going to College - culinary, cosmetology, etc. ;Create jobs training and accessible jobs.;Universal basic income idea - City in CA every person in city gets a certain amount of dollars every month. Your living isn't predicated on being able to find work at any given moment. People should be able to meet basic needs.;Graduate high school and get a decent paying job, part time job shouldn't have to become your only option for a full time job.;concerns about jobs becoming too tech-oriented;Living wage important.;Put pressure on companies for better incomes.;Duke will pay fair share of salary to employees - staff and not just faculty.;Jobs that pay what person's work is worth.;Need more workers in hospitality sector. There is high turnover.;I don't hear a lot about an economic plan - needs to be sustainable. Another bell weather employer or 2.;Building trades - workforce development- certain occupations are really in demand. Made in Durham does some of this. Internships - we should do more of this.;In NE Durham, there was concern that light rail would bring in employees from other places so they started good job training. ;Jobs that pay what person's work is worth.;DTCC - too hard to see what's available, job upgrades;Better tool people for upward mobility - community college.;Developers aren't giving jobs to people in Durham, that live in Durham;Job creation for non techies;Jobs - equal pay;living wage (do not incentivize otherwise);Youth - more than 1 hub. Affordable youth housing (Durham Tech students);Students and youth population of color have spaces downtown. Nonprofits can open their doors to the people of Durham;Youth should have an opportunity to engage with this process and the development of Durham;Youth and Adult partnerships; Made in Durham; Youth ambassadors; children participating in planning processes;people: educate the youth on how to make money so that money can be spread around; Community centers; youth, technical, daycare, tutuoring, after-school programs;a lot of things for sale evade people on how to save this money. show kids how to invest money, so that they spread it throughout the community. find ways to educate;Connections and Opportunities for the youth such as mentors, training, and witness entrepreneurs ;A Hub Farm for every school;trust that children are safe at all times ;There's nothing downtown for small children; would be nice to see a Marbles, or something else interactive;Woman wants her daughter to grow up in the Durham she grew up in - great teachers who pushed her to be all she could be; would love to see the community feel come back: block parties, summer camps, after school programs. Now all that stuff is expensive. If city created more safe spaces for kids it would greatly benefit the community;Activities and job training for youth;Young people may not feel safe at church - did not feel welcome. Push back on traditional values.;Youth nurtured;All development, especially new businesses and housing should be conditioned on work-based learning and jobs for youth;Want more activities for children.;Activities for youth that are not expensive, facilities for young people;Sports, recreation, programs specifically geared for youth;Free sports.;Youth sports to support healthy living.;Need more libraries - more open and marketed to youth.;Ideal Durham - youth activities and open events day and night, need more areas for play and activity (Increase budget - more rec centers and designed for youth).;Jeffrey Canada Harlem Youth Zone - lack of activities  and  mentorship new model. Educational mental health, health services, Make Durham a frequent place for people to come back to. More comprehensive care is needed for youth.;Durham 2030: emphasis on providing spaces and activities for youth;2030 visions: specific programs and activities for youth;No child left behind in Durham - engage the youth in the community;Youth need to be nurtured and many people growing older in Durham ;Concerned about what we're leaving for our children and grandchildren? ;Tiny houses - need them here , would move into one, way more affordable. Habitat builds some. Need to change zoning laws to allow. ;ADUs encouraged;Zoning- Private and Public to address affordability;Zoning analysis if it is effective in producing density and preserving open space. Balance the two. Gets at the transit issues.;Increase housing density in Central division without displacement;Stapleton in Denver is a good example of a density neighborhood with trees;move away from zoning that support residential single family development only-started already;Tensions between creating or restricting more housing and rezoning;Restrictions on developers so it's not all paved - require interconnectedness between neighborhoods; require connection to mass transit. ;Infill development, ADV look at Portland Grow up not out. Look at them as role models;Improve zoning access to small scale livestock;More dense housing and multi-use zoning. Maybe no single family zoning. The compact neighborhood plan that was part of light rail plan. Maintain affordability.;Open housing code to allow no parking with dense housing, hostels, and get around with public transit.;Dept. of Health - get a variance - want people to be able to do that;character base and not use base;Zoning or laws where you cannot go past a certain square footage;Zoning that tells people what the can and cannot do;It feels like the UDO is where you can control developers.;Clear cutting development scraped earth large houses.;Interest in making everything for developers discretionary, not right.  ;Could be legal concerns with arbitrarily making decisions like this about proposed developments.;Require developers to use impervious pavers.;change in a strategic way and not in a reactive way;Statewide regulations need changing;Overreach in the legislature;private enterprises-Toronto ordinance;Rely on OBM;Proposal brought by one of the participants;Minneapolis model referenced: residual impacts on families, students and funding;Durham for All;Nonprofit accessibility, word out;Corporations as people - money as speech so no;Community;Stop everything so we can fix it (Housing bond, evictions);immediate action: moratorium-extensive survey, creek;AA KS Spanish;nonprofit accessibility, word out;stop everything so we can fix it(housing bond, evictions, );Comm. for Habitat for Humanity and Council;Programs created would be good ;Coming from Hillsboro :( ;How far out is this plan? ;Planning communities;Starting moving towards future thinking versus post-thinking;Enforcement of nuisances in a more proactive way;People oriented;an Andrew Yang "thing" and "thang";Live in suburbs but within city limits ;Address generational polarity. ;Keeping residents informed--people should know about hardship funds. Make things more accessible.;Not everything on computer.;access to necessary resources for families not receiving the help and support they need because of language barrier, transportation, etc.;Information on one common website on Durham to access prior to moving here.;Phone marketing on University programs and focus on community involvement in programs. ;What are better ways to be notified about these meetings? Lack of communication in Durham about meetings - big need attention getting things. ;Durham should create a One Stop One Place to find out all things going on in Durham ;All non-profits should be registered at this site and any agencies that award grants or have assistance programs;Communication-getting the information out ;City Calendar - City Channel - Social Media shares;Communication to *all* people. The dealing of what's going on in local government and county governments planning and zoning ideas, etc...;Communication to all people. How to find out what's going in in their city and county. ;How do you get more information for parents in schools? To report problems;Better access for disabled folks.;Volunteer opportunities for the disability in Durham;Accessibility for people with disabilities;all areas of city accessible to people with disabilities;All facilities would have access for wheelchairs or baby carriages. Everything would be handicapped accessible.;Blind people ask that stops not be moved because, for them, moving a stop about 3 feet is like moving it 3 miles.;Where everyone is able to afford something.;resources--more affordable;something everyone can afford no matter your socioeconomic status;better(more affordable);Lately folks in Durham have to fight so hard to be able to make it. Meeting ends.;Make beautiful but affordable;Affordable childcare;I'm moving to Mebane, where I can afford to own land at a reasonable price range;More stores with affordable clothing;Nothing is affordable;I like to see more affordable living.;Lower tax and housing cost;Black folks are selling land because of lack of funds. Make livable for blacks.;High taxes and low pay;Cost of living. Pay is low and cost of living is high.;Accessible and affordable childcare;Lots of people in Durham cannot afford basic necessities;Cost of living not rising due to this. ;Increase on salary to afford the houses in Durham. ;Cost of living lowered with increase pay ;In 15 years, I would describe Durham as a very expensive city to live in. I feel like everything will increase in the city because how things are now. Not many people will be able to afford to live in Durham. ;wages vs cost of living;Cheaper Grocery stores;Not having to use my energy to find a place to live and rent;If raising the rent, the minimum wage has to go up;Can't afford childcare;Working 3-4 12 hour shifts but can't find somewhere to lay my head. ;Negatives: not a place for artists to showcase work;more places for young artists to show off their work;For painter, farmer markets organic displays all over the city;more public art;more funding for local artists, particularly non white;more music, live music, concerts, more bars, more liveliness;more funding for arts;put some public art in lower income areas where people could benefit most;commission more city sponsored youth art projects;Increased funding for the arts;More use of local artists as opposed to paying people outside of the community;Durham does a good job offering arts subsidies and should increase that;You don't see as many black people living in Durham; there needs to be spaces for people of all races to live;A place of "open community" where all are accepted and welcome to live, work, play. ;Recognize the value we each bring. Every citizen, every community member of the City of Durham will grow to understand their value.;I live in Durham but do not feel connected to Durham;Lived in Durham for 10 years but still don't feel like Durham is home;I live and work in Durham but do not feel part of the Durham community;What are the business incubators, co-working spaces, and start-ups doing to ENFRANCHISE Durham's working poor? ;We have a lot of businesses that are in the shadows need more cohesive economic development beyond traditional Durham Chamber of Commerce. Still a bit too cliquey in Durham either you are in or out of the loop. Would like to see dialogues like the one you hosted held on a more frequent basis not just when a document is being created. ;More business opportunities for native Durham residents (particularly African American);What is Durham going to do to help make business survive and own businesses again?;Needs more shopping areas in southern Durham where houses and residences are going up, need more drug stores and food restaurants. ;Better grant opportunities for businesses for felons.;Offer felons better jobs and skill training to enter society again to become successful.;I would like to see more job and job training opportunities to help or aid balancing income.;Not a lot of jobs want to hire students just for the summer  ;More job opportunities for those with no degree  ;More internships that college students from the area could come home to  ;City small business support plan.;Not leveraging business enough. ;Lack of trades. Educate youth on trades.;Make it easier for folks coming out of prison. I work for a business and then get fired because they do another record check.;Have these people work under maintenance worker in city to learn trade. ;Apprentice program. ;More avenues for art;Business;Training for business ethics;more community and business partnerships;businesses incentivized to offer free services and pro bono services to people in community;Developers and companies and  Don’t close Northgate without providing alternatives to small businesses who have no where to go;More support towards small Businesses ;Positives: nice people;Ways to improve negatives: have more meetings;involving more in everyday events then non-related outdoor life;civilized community;how to involve "gangs" to help make a change?;Have community leaders.;Durham is my home, therefore I want to protect it. I want people to feel more of a community sense. Boomers and millennials need to get along.;Blackspace and is: otherspace black. Habitat for ? Provide me with career options after school and lets make a difference in community;Community Clean Up;community block parties;community days, like field day for the kids;Suggested use for Grant funds: Community engagement events (ex: community cookouts in targeted neighborhoods);More unity, pretty much preach but, don't do it. Help one another. ;Every community member will seek ways to serve others using their gifts and talents, putting others interest above their own.;Every community member will contribute to the betterment of the city, seeking to help and not to harm.;That we will seek solutions to the challenges we face day-to-day much more than we complain;Church and civic engagement join together in prayer without ceasing to truly be God's handiwork doing good works to transform Durham ;Durham's ability or efforts to gather and exchange ideas among young professionals;Need to bring together more intergenerational conversations in safe spaces. ;I like the social action aspects of Durham. The groups that strive to make Durham better. I like the up and coming social scene and the job opportunities (RTP);Community support, affordable housing, family events.;Supportive networking;More Community.;We need grants for more black businesses and nonprofit organizations that impact our neighborhoods.;Intergenerational living is good for everybody – not a targeted population but broad enough that people can live in a community without a unified disability, want to be part of a community, scattered site or units,;Diverse welcome package. Offering different opportunities to give back to communities. ;Good Neighbor fund. If you sign up you will get a % off taxes. But, if an issue arises, they are ready to help. Food, materials.;I came to visit a friends ;A program that are inside under privileged neighborhoods to address the communities immediate needs;community services;community cleanup ;greater intense church involvement;integrated communities; less isolation;everyone respected;Community capacity building ;Continue to make Durham a great place to live... ;PTSD is a big issue here related to crime, lack of jobs, resources, shooting. Car speeds down street and kids start running.;Put a team of people in communities to work. Send people trained to deal with crisis.;Live in an area with a lot of hurt and pain;Negatives about Durham: Policing;Negatives about Durham: Too many shootings, unaccounted for and violence at the children's parks.;How to improve the negatives: Have a better relationship between police and community.;People that are in jail on weed charges would then be released if weed became legalized?;Stop bringing police to everything.;There is crime in Durham because people don't listen and there is nothing to look forward to.;Addressing crime issues--finding the source.;Crime;Concerned about the response time of the police needs to be worked or improved. Example car was hit in front of morning glory about 8pm no help until 10pm;more police patrolling around morning glory;police community with collaboration and know each other, learn each other, stability to build relationships.;More officers to communicate with citizens;too much crime, murders and shootings;Crime ratio needs to be addressed - more officers are still needed;good idea for a residency requirement for the police force;More Gun Control;Crime ratio needs to be addressed - more officers are still needed; Policing. Too many shootings unaccounted for. Violence at the children's parks. ;hold police accountable for wrongful actions. They are human just like us and shouldn't have more authority or freedom than civilians.;Crime rate and poverty.;decreased crime rates, schools that focus on the whole child with teachers that are prepared to deal with the issues of the whole child;more attention to crime;Negatives: Police not doing their job;Lowering crime rate;Stop police harassment;Durham needs more police officers from Durham;Police force needs to stop running red lights for no reason;DHA needs to crack down on drug dealer in the house;Police present in all neighborhoods;No police shootings of African Americans;Adequate Lighting: new and additional to thwart crime;Reduced Crime: gun violence;Sex Trafficking - Mostly in inner-city community;End to the high rate of shootings and death. ;Minor crimes;Crime rate going up, gun violence;Safety - we need more police on the streets.;Less crime and drugs;Too much crime and drugs;Durham is a nice place to live, but the crime rate is at an all time high. We need to help all people not just foreigners. I've lived here for 35 years and I've never seen Durham like this.;Plan for reducing crime in Durham;Controlled crime;Crime;Scammers take advantage of seniors;When People have No hope they tend to commit more Crime!;Heighten police presence;Police - need more;highlight on gang and gun control;Too many shootings.;Police Harassment. Should be protecting and serving.;The police handle people with mental illness the same way as criminals.;Need more training on how to handle different situations.;Less policing.;No crime in Braggtown and not moving black people out; once the crime is cleaned we want safe places to live also.;A lot of shootings  ;Racial profiling  ;It seems like police are given a directive to shoot first and ask questions later. Why is it always fatal for black people? ;Need to do more sensitivity training. ;Why are the targets used for shooting training, figures of black inmates?;Train police force for de-escalation and mental illness;more equal distribution of funding for law enforcement ;Police need better training on how to deal with black and brown (not just shooting them!) F;Better policing. ;I do not feel safe in Durham due to the disproportionate distribution of law enforcement and high crime rates. ;crime rate;divest from law enforcement;gang truce;gun buyback programs;losing too many people to the streets;Durham needs to put resources towards addressing root causes of crime;The police department is a joke. The way people are policed is a joke. Community does not trust them;High crime considering the population #s What is going on? Why is crime getting worse? Over policing is not working;crime is up because people are doing what they have to do to survive;Crime rates, better school system in this city.;Dislike: Gang violence;Bad: When someone was murdered right up the street from where I live. When someone broke into my family members car. Crime rate is bad. ;Crime rates are down and jobs are more obtainable. ;Gang banging in Durham shooting.;Police nowhere to be found.;Low crime rate.;Crime in Durham ;Where are the cops downtown?;More police and community communication;More police outreach rather than reactive.;The police have a quick solution depending on where you live.;More programs to help children in lower income community: gang intervention, drug violence, being a victim of police brutality;Crime, make it stop! ;My ideal Durham would be without crime!;Not put people in jail for needing $5 for the shelter.;If kids fight at school, they get helped, not sent to jail. No suspensions. Instead, do job training.;Cops too judgmental to minorities, raise minimum wage, help with childcare,;High fees and Court cost.;Cops pulling people over and harassing them. Unethical.;More job opportunities for felons and housing availabilities. ;Lower Recidivism: for people who've been in jail, how do we get them back into society, into jobs?;Now when they get out, they can't get jobs or opportunities. ;What are factors that would decrease recidivism;decriminalize poverty;decriminalize drug use;jail deferment programs;eliminate cash bail;restorative justice and transformative justice programs;reentry programs to help people coming out of jail or prison find jobs, housing, education, etc.;no cooperation with ICE;Durham is criminalizing being poor;I do *NOT* like anything in Durham but Resources Section 8 takes too long. (Food stamps, my felon is 10+ years old, and I cannot get them for the rest of my life. This is UNFAIR as I have changed my life and need to feed myself and my children!!! This low is unreasonable and should be changed to a certain extent!!;Ban the box on job *and* housing applications;Worried about my kids - justice system has cases closed because of a lack of evidence. ;Ways to improve negatives: more church awareness;Why does Durham Downtown look so white;ethnic diversity celebrated everywhere;The 9th street area has lost it's charm and becoming more commercial;Food and culture, its a very special place;Somewhere I can express my options freely. A place where I am having a fun and exciting lifestyle. Where there are no people speaking bad opinions for no reason.;Greater intense church involvement; Events that welcome black culture, stepping, etc. ;More culture awareness all over City;concern that black and brown people have space that show their history and legacy;I feel like Durham is losing its uniqueness to homogeneity;Durham is losing the black cultural and history of the city;Culture based activities outside of the black communities;A place that produces local talent in scholarship, sports, business, leadership, technology, entertainment, music, etc.;in my neighborhood, people come in don't know how to collaborate, hold on to culture;Downtown looks too white, makes blacks feel unwanted.;There are more new residents that don't connect with the community;more African American cultural activities like Bimbe;More cultural events at DPAC;culture is being eroded and and or commodified;People and culture building;Mexican stores;Negatives about Durham: Through lack of knowledge a lot of black men are putting themselves in harmful and criminal positions.;More black awareness.;Black Men have no health care;What may be done to address the sense of futility that Black Durhamites feel?;Help the black people;I would like to see more involvement of the Spanish community. Some times I don't feel a part of Durham. I am Hispanic. One Last thing I am an American citizen plus I'm Hispanic.;There are more white people;White people have taken over areas of the City that they wouldn't dare walk through 5 years ago;white;more diversity;Diversity ;Diverse city as a good thing, provides an opportunity for networking publicly;A city with diversity and acceptance in not only people but business (office and retail) and events.;As the city grows the diversity of identities are well represented and not co-existing but instead living in harmony;Look like you could meet someone with a new ethnicity everyday. Feel like the homie feeling you feel in your own home;Smell like a different genre of food on each block.;diversity initiatives that provide more cultural events. Similar to Cary's model;Diversity;Negatives about Durham: stigma and get questioned for be downtown mainly me and my friends when out.;Downtown people walk right in front of the car.;Most restaurants downtown shut down. Why is that? We need a Red Lobster, something people recognize. Something to draw them there.;Downtown, get people there.;Downtown. It's much more revitalized. But it's also becoming much more gentrified;Positives: downtown achievements ;Parking at American Tobacco during the day (I went to Tobacco Road at lunch and couldn't park in the closest parking deck. As a tax-paying city resident, I thought its absurd that I was precluded from going beyond level 1. I went to the parking deck on the other side and many of the spaces were reserved so I couldn't park there. I had to go to the lot behind the old University Ford building. Reasonable consideration should be given to lunch parking in that area. ;For folks at the center, downtown has changed;Attract black race downtown; parking downtown Durham;I hate that downtown Durham has turned into a mini NYC with the large residential condos. It feels very segregated and not inclusive to surrounding communities. There are no programs (that I know of) that want to re-do public housing so that residents don't feel like they live in the slums.;Parking Downtown - free;DT is a high rent district;Was crime downtown. Not anymore but ;Downtown Durham is great - artistic expression, historical sites;Downtown: There are too many apartments and not enough basic needs. If people have to evacuate, there is only one gas station. ;Downtown is flourishing because that's where the white people are;I would do more if there were more options outside of downtown;Main Street is hopping;more things outside of downtown;Downtown has priced people out with rent rates on par with LA and NY and the quality isn't great;Development concentrated downtown: What about Hayti and places like that and  There is not the same care and concerns across the City as is provided downtown;RADIO SILENCE from Duke Law Medicine Divinity regarding the most pressing problems in its community. Did Duke *REALLY* steal all of the affordable housing for its students and favorites? That is what most people believe, if you listen to their conversations around these questions. If it's a perception problem, what is DU doing to dispel it? ;*How* can the money, influence and prestige of Duke University be brought to bear on behalf of its least welathy resident. ;Convening national thought leaders and hearing how they have moved communities from blight to thriving would be a good start. With all the academic minds in the area it is unfortunate if we fail to use that intellect in our own backyard. ;Duke is a greedy...;Deregulation issue with power companies and Duke.;Transit system crashed because of Duke. Why are they dictating what happens in Durham. Duke is holding Durham back.;Why does Duke get to have such a big voice and input on decisions about what happens in the city when they market themselves as their own entity? (light rail);A place that displays the African American history that was and should be prevalent currently in this area. ;good location;The whole city is like a community.;Biggest little city in NC where we value sending our children out to change the world for the better.;I love the easiness of being me;I  appreciate the diversity of Durham and the various venues and events that exhibit its culture;Durham has its good and bad sides like the weather. I believe every part of Durham should be beautiful. We should take pride in our city by showing its greatness. More neighborhoods need beautification.;A City that is inviting and full of color! Place where my children can grow and flourish.;in just 4 years, the things that brought me here are being replaced. new people move in and replicate culture in a low-quality way. make it clear to others that they don't belong;Positives: becoming more city like;A place where people can come to learn, grow, experience things they can't in other cities. ;I see Durham becoming a fresh place in the "mid south" for young people who are ready to build careers and families in the area with affordable housing.;Loves Durham;Where the city meets the country;Southern hospitality mixed with a busy day blue collar business men and women ;Durham should be focused on the positive branding not just with the city but with the business and public schools in the city of Durham.;*More* positive things about Durham on News;What, or is there, a city or state that we are trying to pattern Durham after?;A place where we are proud to call home;Community and People: social aspects; educational universities; small business; location in proximity of state;Durham hasn't felt like home in years.;A beautiful thriving City.;One big city where all help each other;A Durham that keeps it cultural its culture intact through new developments and residents ;Durham should be a place of peace and diversity. ;more opportunities for people to experience Durham outside of their neighborhood;bright, colorful;Durham is not as integrated as it portrays itself to be;Durham gets a bad rap due to crime and media reporting;Durham geared more toward younger and downtown crowd;Durham is a powder keg, about to erupt, marginalized people are fed up and are fighting back;Why is Durham so segregated?;Don't forget the people who built this City;I want Durham to continue to be a place with creative space, culture, music, food to enjoy and all people deserve access to these things;A "Clean" Durham  :);Very beautiful Durham;Developers having to abide by policies that protect citizens within neighborhoods;process of selecting builders that have relationships with those that live within the communities for many years.;City government using local and diverse contractors for development;How do community leaders go home at night knowing that there are plenty of issues?;Durham is full of it.;Durham is very misleading.;I don't trust what people say will happen until I see it.;You say you want to help but you don't walk the walk.;They make decisions and then bring paperwork to residents to sign but residents know nothing about it.;Stop giving false hope.;Not budgeting for things like crosswalks and participatory budgeting. Instead, use it on real things and managing money correctly.;Elected officials need to know what it's like to live in public housing.;Come to the community and see how we live--like in MacDougal.;Stop having people volunteer to do things, give input, for free. Don't ask for our input and service on committees for free.;information distribution regarding meetings;Will Engage Durham encourage Durham residents to participate in the 2020 census?;Put a big ad in the Indy, more effective outreach, social media- Facebook, visiting schools, visit barbershops, restaurants, outdoor banners , etc.;Will Engage Durham come back to the community to show us how these ideas are being incorporated into the comprehensive plan;How will we find out about how the community input has been used;accountable government city wide creditable;increased community engagement to continue to apply pressure to those in charge to get something done;Residents are treated with respect and equally;We are happy to be included in this process and look forward to positive improvements for all Durham residents, young, old, disabled, black, brown and white.;Is this process a waste of my time? How can I be sure?;An environment where government makes it easy to be involved;not enough information given out;Know who's doing the comprehensive plan and how will they be accountable. ;use my privilege to...people who wouldn't come to this kind of thing, be vulnerable to people who have hurt them;Consistency from ambassadors!;WOM needs to make a comeback. FB live, podcasts, zoom, skype, Insta Live;*youth ambassadors*;Time management for maximum input from participants: allow time to vent, ask for suggestions!, encourage the exchange of ideas!;Foster St. coffee has a free conference room;can we enlist our co-workers? how can we give voice to un-heard groups of people?;youth engagement- vision board activity;will there be more listening and learning sessions?;Better communication from City officials;Better leadership;Will the City really use funds to meet the needs as stated by the poll taken at the end of PLAN??;No one and I mean no one acknowledges what I have to say.;Holding officials accountable only happens when those most affected have a voice. This crisis with McDougald had highlighted the challenges of parceling off sections of a community and not seeing them as contributors. We should not make that mistake again.;Officials held accountable.;There need to be checks and balances in Durham. Hold government and agencies accountable;More community engagement with city and county officials;How often will Engage Durham meetings take place?;How can I find out about the meetings?;Need Governing Body for All. there is too much discrimination.;people don't feel they're being heard;Don't make city employees feel they can't speak peacefully;Place where government and being involved isn't hard. After returning to Durham the continuous cranes makes Durham a postcard city.;As opposed to just have a conversation do something about it. Have more conversations like this in order to bring change.;Will the politicians who just got elected actually help our people ?;We need to see where the lottery money is going. ;All residents need equal access to the city and its resources.  ;Policy makers need to be in touch with underserved communities so when new crosswalk or new high rise are considered make a deliberate effort to reach those communities – reach out to disabled people when we’ll be impacting them ;Mayor Committee for people with disabilities is a good contact ;Survey about Main st restriping, there’s survey about how to do that, asks about how the intersections and crossings should be designed,  ;Centralized area that would combine a lot of departments that could handle how accessibility issues affect different departments, for instance sidewalks, the obstacles put in the sidewalk by waste management, they’re doing their job but they need to be sensitive to accomplish their job with an eye out for accessibility issues ;Communication – being able to call and get the right person to talk to about sidewalks and crosswalks is a challenge, I bet I’ve called 10 people about the person parked in the loading zone, but there’s no clarity on who is responsible, it is discouraging ;Votes are a waste. the City is going to do what they want at the end of the day.;Our word won't make a difference. Government doesn't listen to us.;Durham One Call - sent in email was CC'd in. Got the runaround and was never fixed. Riddle Rd after cross over railroad.;City sponsor voter education programs;Push voting, education:digitial board of people running for position;Push voting, education: public display of who's running and what they are about;Push voting, education: Put it @ central park;Lack of voters means city should focus on voter education to include more people in voting.;Let the County residents vote on city initiatives that affect them.;Voter registration - something that needs attention. ;Accountability - for low grades with housing authority;Make Facebook events Social Media;Streamline process for getting married and name changed to get new IDs;city and county government leadership;elected officials representative of the communities they serve;hold city council meetings in underserved communities instead of always in city hall;encourage more creativity in how Durham addresses problems ;the city is plotting on Fayetteville st, Alston ave;There is a disconnect between elected officials and citizens;Elected officials do not care;city has knowingly let people live in uninhabitable conditions;City and County pitted against each other to avoid accountability for fixing issues;City needs to stop over utilizing the kindness of its citizens;The city treats its residents like they are dumb or ignorant;Does the City think southern people are stupid?;City needs to work on case management system across organizations;City Council members are interested in their own political aspirations and are not listening to electorate;The City should offer more frequent engagement opportunities like this. Everyone cannot make it to City Hall;"I feel empowered in even being asked";Our elected officials are not effective;City needs compassion;How many ambassadors do they need?;When are they going to set up the Human Relations Department? It is currently a volunteer commission, but it used to be a division with several employees.;Committees and Boards of Trustees for each zip code area;PACS - already 1, 2 or 3 per district;Things happening in order to make things work. They're hurtful.;Solution - you have already started;Focus on one project at a time;Let my ideas be heard and do something about it.;Where are the people in charge of county or city maintenance?;Who speaks in the Durham Department?;Taking better care of ALL of Durham citizens;Funding streams not evenly distributed throughout the city;access to resources for all;closing the wealth gap, increasing revenue and resources within minority communities, SBA;Disparity study for assistance;I enjoy the progress Durham has made but sometimes the government doesn't immediately recognize how it's systems are not equitable. What's on my mind is reassurance.;All communities thrive and not just one.;Cares and caters to all members of community;Attention to Universities equally.;a progressive Durham where everyone benefits;clean, diverse, equitable, positioned for people to thrive;Build up the city for everyone with equal opportunity;What will be done to *ensure* that more than a fortunate few will reap the benefits of RAD and Opportunity Zones?;Growth among all races;Ideal Durham is a city that embraces and accommodates all, promotes small minority business in all areas. Market resource better to families, homeless population, and higher minimum wages;Supports local colleges and universities equally;Durham's prosperity has helped us all but we must not bask in it to the detriment of unborn generations. We have a unique opportunity to be an example of what happens when intention meets attention meaning we can make the choice to be focused on our development of communities are now marginalized and truly have a Durham that works for most not a select few. ;Equal opportunity for the entire community;A place where all citizens can benefit from the economic development;More equal opportunity. Cease internal hiring. ;This could be an organizational event for changes within community. Stop hiring internally and reach out to other individuals in the community.;Equal housing for all. Stop pushing black people out and making Durham white. Creating a way to provide decent living for the poor.;a prosperous community and a place where all people have opportunities for their health and well-being, regardless of income and or racial identity;equitable placement of sidewalks and crosswalks in underserved communities;equitable placement of recycling bins;adequate equitable placement of street lights;centering the most marginalized in planning;more POC involved in decision making;inclusive to everyone - racially, gender, class, LGBTQ, people with disabilities, religiously, ethnically, culturally;utilization of the equitable engagement blueprint in all city planning;equitable access to early childhood education;address the basic needs for all citizens;Everybody in Durham deserves an opportunity to have the same experience regardless of socio-economic status, race, gender identity, sexual orientation, etc.;All of the education and wealth in this city, no one should be left behind;Ideal Durham has equal opportunities for everyone. ;A place with opportunities for all in Home, Work, and Life;I can't believe Durham Station doesn't have a McDonalds, some place to eat.;No 7/11s downtown. I have to get in my car to get mustard.;A Target on the empty car lot downtown.;People downtown have to get in a car to get diapers.;Kroger on MLK closed, now we're in a food desert on Cook Road.;The entire group agreed that we need a supermarket. since Kroger left, no market has taken their place.;No food deserts in the city;deliver food options;affordable foods options;Suggested use for Grant funds: Build community greenhouse. Get Lowes involved as sponsor to supply what grant won't cover. ;Food stamps for all in need ;Food Assistance: for city residents at or below poverty but ineligible for Food Stamps ;Equitable distribution stores (grocery) and not convenient stores;Super Market in the Downtown Area;No grocery store downtown! Have to go CH. Supermarket with lots of stuff in it would be great. Walmart, food lion, Harris teeter, something like that.;No stores that are open 24/7. Need to call someone or get a ride to get to a store. Stores here are expensive;Access to things - grocery store;Resources for healthier foods and delivery to seniors;What about food supplements for seniors?;Can food banks come back into communities?;Food insecurity - 1000 people visit school pantry a year. food banks available isn't enough to provide for all the families that need food.;Housing – visited someone who lived closed to grocery store and strip mall, but the sidewalks were all torn up and not necessarily a safe neighborhood, safer place to live that has access to walking distance access to resources banks, grocery stores, concerns where kids steal food and then there's a restraining order on the parents at the grocery store within walking distance ;Increase more gas stations, supermarkets, and stores with basic needs downtown;More doctor offices in the county, grocery stores, entertainment with all the building they're doing;vacant lots converted to community gardens;fresh food options for NCCU students;equitable access to healthy food;grocery co-ops;city sponsored programs showing people how to grow their own food and incentivize growing your own food;restaurants need to give unused food to homeless instead of throwing it away;walkable fresh grocers;access to nutritious food for all;Central students need access to more dining options, grocery stores;Too many food deserts when Durham considers itself a food haven;Access to food;Positives: great restaurants;I am not super familiar with Durham as I am not from here and I usually only come to Durham for school. But I would like to see more places outside of the schools campus where students can relax in between classes or more variety in restaurant options throughout Durham. I don't really have too many other thoughts about Durham because I am not here very often.;I love the diversity and the food!!! Durham has become such a great food scene.;Local restaurants;Why do some communities get funding and others don't;equitable school funding;more city support of nonprofits doing grassroots work;more funding grassroots organizations doing the work with no resources;free grant writing programs;Where is all of the money and funding going?;Not enough $$ being put into certain things;stop raising property tax;Want to know more about itemized property taxes. tax rates are going up because of new development being built. Homestead exemption- word not getting around. ;Why property taxes continue to increase;Money needs to go into crime instead of moving citizens out ;Expansion of resources to cover programming;Taxes are skyrocketing;Who is funding all these things?;Funding;Grant opportunities for non profit;Tax dollars being used;Taxes going up - $250,000 - $500,000 moving in the communities causing others to pay higher;Grandfather clause for property taxes;Increase in taxes in neighborhoods that are "gentrified";Used that past money for what?;Taxes- increase;1. An in-depth review and look at how gentrification is affecting our communities. ;Gentrification  ;Gentrification - stopping that, keeping people from getting pushed out;Not getting so many solicitations from people trying to buy your house;What are they going to do about gentrification?;Negatives: gentrification;gentrification;Gentrification. It's something. It's war.;Gentrification. It's something. It's war.;gentrification ;Improve all area's of Durham without pushing black and brown people out of Durham;The gentrification;Gentrification and availability of most ethnic "stuff";With sidewalks, more street lights and no more gentrification or evictions;Rude, no voice in the community, downtown homes are expensive, pushing other communities out of the way, downtown changing.; Education on not selling homes to companies for low cost.;Downtown doesn't feel like Downtown anymore. Its completely different. feels like its inclusive to everyone. Being pushed out due to taxes being raised. People are asked to purchase homes at low prices. Leave us alone and we don't want to move. Marketing for black owned businesses. Formal list of black owned businesses as before. Promotion of programs for black businesses; Gentrification. Zoning - more information about what this all necessary means makes a big difference. Transit roads. LRT would benefit the downtown areas and senior citizens. Gentrification didn't start yesterday, 2005 indicated south of 147 would be for the black middle class. Light rail would stop on Pettigrew. People are losing their property.;Roxboro Road and sidewalks; state legislatures controlling Durham too much. The apartments are too expensive. Who are they for? Durham has best healthcare and RTP is on the map. People living here are not getting the same info as people moving here. Housing is going up in Creedmoor, Bad roads. McDougald terrace has been in Durham a long time and you can just imagine the condition of the building, Let folks know how they will be impacted, Repairs could be added to rent. Its inexcusable that this has been allowed to happen. Who do we hold a accountable? call 311 and have them ask about EngageDurham and survey.;Gentrification;increased property values leading to higher taxes;outside people coming into neighborhood;affordable housing-gentrification-has Durham made plans to help people getting pushed out? fixed income, middle income- difficult for me to find housing, pushing out to surrounding counties- are we helping or just pushing people out;displacement leads to desperation- stripped away, taken, made to feel they don't belong;Gentrification is driving homelessness;Property value going up which contributes to homeless;Affordability that stops gentrification;STOP converting black neighborhoods into amenities for the AFFLUENT CLASS! ;Gentrification-- people being pushed out of the neighborhoods they grew up in and invested in. Should be able to live where they always have rather than being pushed out by newcomers. ;What is Durham doing to *assure* displaced residents that gentrification will not shut them out of the neighborhoods in which they have invested a lifetime? ;Gentrification of old refurbished buildings;Gentrification;Gentrification = high taxes keep increasing--;You are pushing black people out of downtown - So expensive to live or dine downtown.;Gentrification: Downtown Residential and commercial buildings. Housing prices up; Lack of recreational facilities for kids.;The neighborhoods (gentrification) and the entertainment and social scenes. Also, cost of living is insane. ;presentation of community - not selling homes, gentrification, restore new journey for youth;gentrification is tearing Durham apart. Even families who've been here for years aren't communicating the same. places like "black space" are in Durham a safe place for youth to be. Creating more places like this throughout Durham;People being put out of homes they've lived in all their lives.;Don't wait until neighborhood is being gentrified before fixing it up!;No gentrification.;Property taxes are too high This is Durham's way of pushing out more black people. ;If transit is established and developments such as ___ then rebuild and place families back into that community as if they never left paying or staying as subsidized and housing developments.;Stop pushing low income families of their homes and neighborhood.;stop white investor buying black communities;when white people move to a predominantly black area, the home values go up. This makes it harder on black communities in Durham to survive. ;The redlined(historically and forcibly  segregated)neighborhoods are now being purchased by white people.;Its interesting that they created laws that made us live in those areas but now they want to the black people out.;Why is gentrification so abundant in Durham? ;A non gentrified city.;-It seems as though things build-up to make white people feel safe at the detriment of black people's homes and communities ;Black people have been massively displaced. The drastic change in the price of housing has been jarring and has led to the displacement of black and brown people. Its sad that no one has stopped this.;People that are born and raised in Durham can stay (born and raised) property raises. moving.;I don't want gentrification, but I don't know how to fix it (maybe affordable housing). ;I'm getting so many calls and mailers about selling my house, it's too much. Plus my property taxes just went up by 25% *and* my mortgage payment went up. It's getting harder and harder. ;Where are the black people being pushed out to?;When will white people right the wrongs of black people; and give them what is rightfully ours. Better schools, much better wages to live on, home ownership, nice areas for black people to live and stop pushing us out of our homes and putting us in projects to live.;Why is it ok for predatory buyers to text, call, email, and mail you that they want to buy homes from black people (if I don't call about selling my home, I shouldn't have to deal with these types of people wanting my home).;Gentrification is another way of segregation, bondage, controlling what black people can make to live, Big Daddy watching you, keeping us as second class people, still living like slaves, being controlled by one group of people, expensive houses but low wages, division among people and community, you feel the hate still that white people have for blacks, white people move into your community and can't speak and look at you like you in the wrong for living where you live.;Don't let these big time buyers buy up all the land and there be nothing left for us regular people to be able to buy to become homeowners.;gentrification;gentrification "cleaning up = cleaning out";Black lives matters signs on the lawns of gentrified neighborhoods;how can we improve the city without further displacing people or causing additional harm?;People are being priced out of their homes due to development particularly close to downtown;I am afraid to lose my home with this growth and development;Working in domestic violence prevention, I can see very direct correlations between what is happening with gentrification, healthcare, income disparities, etc. Addressing the basic needs of citizens would lead to less violence across the board;While I am not in any immediate danger of losing my home (at least for now) I remain concerned about my fellow citizens;Development is not accessible to the people who have been in Durham for generations, causing people to be displaced;Redevelopment: Gentrification;parks;Nice open spaces; better parks;more parks;Every park in Durham should be fixed up for children;Durham would smell, and look like more trees, metro system. You would think Durham has a sports team or someone pumping your gas -then it's almost like Durham is trying to be New Jersey and New York, but it's not the same. It should compensate people by having the cost of living match.;Clean energy. Invest in renewable energy. adding greenery on roof. able to grow food on top of homes and buildings for more food.;Not a lot of tall buildings, keeping a lot of green spaces;grass, sidewalks, Public Spaces, Activities, and Recreation clean and maintained;Beautiful public parks which feel safe and well lit;maintain parks and extend hours;more open spaces with grass, plants, etc.;I like the Sarah P. Duke Gardens.;Construction and operation of public toilets in city parks;More city-like;Keep bringing parking garages up, they need to go underground. That's expensive but that's good property. Eventually going to have to go there.;what model has Durham chosen to mirror regarding holistic planning;what's going on with the growth in Durham;allowing outside companies to build in Durham. Need to have more incentives for Durham Residents. Must be affordable for all, not just new residents;I hope as Durham continues to grow and develop that all of the people who have lived here benefit financially and otherwise from the development;Growth;Durham is a really weird place and its getting bigger. Durham is really trashy and I don't really like that.;in 4-10 years every project that is being worked on should now be complete and those funds or new funds should be allocated to projects that help for the community.  More shelters.;construction in inner city should be finished.;Looks like progression without isolation.;more growth around NCCU, ;would like to see homes developed, but also people-what's being done to build the people? if community is empowered, they have a sense of dignity. people from here fear that the people that built this city will be left out;Suggested use for Grant funds: Make use of undeveloped land behind Bell Yeager.;Growth. It seems Durham is growing up, literally. As NC continues to be the fastest growing state (I think) in population so the housing must grow with it. Unfortunately the cost of housing is also going way up. ;It's growing but, not properly growing! Example: People coming from big cities for a better life but, bringing crime with you. Big City through which increase things that were not here at first.;The growth of East Durham in the last couple of years has been good and bad. Like most places change is not always easy for those who have been around for years. However I'm new and excited to see the growth. ;Not overcrowded and the no hold barred response that the city has allowed from folks to move to Durham and simply take over, without regards for hometown folks, the homeless, and the lower class;Growing, Love it;Growing. Been here 13 years.;Aesthetically enhancing the look of Durham with no benefit to the citizens can only last on a temporary basis;Maintains the city, but small town feel while continuing to grow and expand. ;Growth by way of business coming to the area, tourist attractions, and lively city entertainment;redevelopment of the Fayetteville Street and Alston Avenue corridors, without pushing current residents out of their homes. ;21st century shopping in Northern Durham, at minimum - Target, and more upscale restaurants, a shopping Mall;Durham gets about 100 to 200 new people from other states to live here every year.;People come to Durham seeking better living.;What in the world is going on?;Why is Durham changing so much?;When and how often will these changes occur?;I live here all my life. Something is built every day. Where will the deer live?;I am scared of all these changes. It will have some good things but mostly impacts will be negative;Growth in downtown area;Less projects;Downtown growth with people;Slow down - too fast;More transportation - too many people;Love the growth of downtown;Like growth of city and transformation of downtown;Concerns of growth exceeding current infrastructure (roads, zoning, etc.) and sustainability;Development of historical Fayetteville Square;Lakewood can be redone;Not having so many high rises downtown, knocking people out. Trying to make it a little New York = or Atlanta. ;Moving Back to Durham after being away for 20 years -then culture shock. ;I do not like Durham because traffic is terrible, Houses are over priced. My family lives here and I support my kids in which they reside in Durham.;Traffic has increased. Cost of living has increased. Housing is not affordable. ;Growth is great when everyone benefits, not just a certain group of people.;Less construction.;The downtown landscape and new buildings ;The way they are building up downtown  ;More city like  ;Is for development @Northgate mall. It will bring more $;revitalize Northgate;revitalize phoenix square;revitalize black wall st;Durham is building up for people with money;Make sure the people and neighborhoods outside of downtown are also growing;Downtown access 20 years ago downtown Durham was dead. Durham is growing to be a major city.;Due to ongoing construction on my street I don't even have a place to put my trash bins to be picked up;Durham is heading in the direction of Raleigh and will soon be like Atlanta if any intervention doesn't happen soon as it relates to congestion, traffic, gentrification;less population. more than likely still the same. ;Less population ;Look and feel like Briar Creek, 15-101, New Hope commons, Patterson Place ;veterans treated horribly--Durham needs to connect with the VA to help them;holistic health for everyone;More handicapped accessible;Wellness-Health;Better Healthcare;A prosperous community and a place where all people have opportunities for their health and well-being regardless of income and/or racial identity.;No healthcare for single men;High prices for insurance ;addiction programs ;explain the practical dangers of addiction... If you get strung out, you will be in the streets!;My people are suffering from a lack of good dental care. Many people I spoke to have teeth missing. This certainly has a bearing in employability-- as my lack of orthodontia *certainly* limited some of my options. It must also affect self-concept and self-esteem. This is the "City of Medicine." Durham is FAILING its poor and working class residents. ;Addiction program need to be universal. Either there is too much freedom for people dealing with addiction issues, or it's a prison. Need *meaningful" employment alongside recovery and treatment. ;How can we make health care more accessible to more people?;What can be done to address the *dental* needs of low-wealth people?;More access to healthcare for people of all economic and racial backgrounds;A Durham where neighborhoods are, citizens are healthy, leadership is representative of local concerns over party, state and federal issues;Affordable medical care;Health care resources (Primary Care);Mental Health;We have security cameras in our neighborhood before they fix living conditions.;The way mental illness gets treated.;Affordable Mental Health Care.;Put a focus on mental health ;Subsidize mental help;Medical field: Hold doctors accountable to make sure they help patients: don't endanger their lives with risky medicine; if something happens, say doctors won't get paid and dock their pay to encourage reliable use.;We also should focus more on mental illness especially for poor people. ;Focus on mental health, more therapists, better mental institutions, better hospitals;Better healthcare program;Better healthcare ;intramurals;wellness and health;adequate mental health, drug rehab facilities;Medicare for all;healthcare outreach to underserved communities;free healthcare;mobile health clinics;improved health outcomes for marginalized communities;harm free;accessible clinics;detox programs;city subsidized gym memberships;public showers;medication assistance for people with mental illness;more treatment for people with mental illnesses or disabilities;syringe exchanges to prevent people from dumping them in parks;accessible healthcare;more mental health resources, affordable mental health resources;training programs to convert shelter animals to service and emotional support animals;I have asthma now that I attribute to the pollution and the increase in traffic on my street;people are waiting weeks for mental health beds;drug programs - free;Smell fresher. No pollution. ;Sober living and sobriety programs;Better therapists especially for Black people  and  certified employees;Lots of people fighting addiction. Hard to say sober without having support. Need patient sobriety services.;Happy;cohesive navigation system that are intentional and eliminate historical segregation;revitalization. "urban renewal"- find a way to make beneficial to community-way to restrict-"shared equity";"Opportunity Zones" appear to be "Urban Revitalization 2.0" ;What can the City of Durham do to address the FEAR of speaking out about current conditions? Durhamites have a sense of futility and hopelessness that has lingered since the advent of "Urban Renewal." ;My family has been in Durham for > 100 years. City segregated and destroyed in the 50s. Rich business owners kept City separated by RR tracks. the administrators of the city did not help the city. black people helped themselves;rebuilding historical Durham and widening Fayetteville street but, going around without destroying historical landmarks or homes;For generations, this city has been long in promises to black, brown and poor white working folk-- and short on DELIVERY. There is funding for EVERYTHING except real human needs. ;Inclusive *NOT* just LBGTQ welcoming, acknowledging the history of Durham and *WHO* was here previously. Safer neighborhoods and less crime.;family, history here;preservation of historic sites, particularly black historical sites and landmarks;not much has changed in 30 years;Durham has a rich history that needs to be preserved;Better knowledge of the History of Durham ;Negatives: panhandling;Negatives: not enough homeless shelters;Stop charging homeless people for room and board.;zero homelessness;Urban Ministry participants somewhere to go ;City of Durham Day Center for showering, location to rest and include local partners to carry it out;Reduced homeless;Reduced homeless and more jobs with better incomes;Now it seems there is a growing number of homeless that even while the city and state "grows," they are being left behind. ;What is being done to *prevent* homelessness for adults and working families? The question "How will *you* keep this from happening again?" is the deal breaker that puts families on the streets. what kind of *long-term* homelessness diversion is contemplated?;Build more shelters for homeless people instead of giving land to people with a lot of money and are not doing anything with it;Fix up abandoned houses for people to move in instead of paying for new land;Homeless Assistance: increased number of beds, medical and mental health, job training;Homelessness ;No homeless people.;5. Homeless;Help for the homeless;Comprehensive mental health help for the homeless ;What about our homeless. Mental Health Plan needs to be put in place to help those folks as well. ;elimination of hostile architecture designed to make homeless people uncomfortable and unwelcome;more assistance for homeless  and  poor;hostels for people who live nomadic lifestyles;decrease homelessness;City has neglected the homeless;Ending homelessness should be a top priority;Has the city considered implementing tiny house communities to address homelessness?;Good: Finding family shelter;More shelter for homeless ;Shelter for families.;More shelters - only 1 for families. Not a lot of shelters for homeless. ;Need more shelters - it took forever to get in here.;more shelters;more affordable houses;more shelters;Everyone has a home--but we have 2k on the street today.;Abandoned buildings turned into free shelters, a year to show you're making progress. Put them in the heart of Downtown.;Maybe mini-houses, tiny homes?;True definition of affordable--like Willard Street Apartments--will it be truly affordable?;affordable housing for low income and minimum wage earners;affordable housing ;True affordable housing 75 to 100 thousand for fixed, no income people;affordable housing that looks like everyone else spaces;Better affordable housing for all people sustainable upkeep;more units for single person flat surface homes, handicap accessible inside and outside;zero substandard housing (regardless of who owns with  enough units);expenses of housing;DHA has lost all moral authorities concerning inspections of their properties;Why is it we cannot, as the community, get concrete answers to who owns or what is going to happen to properties in the future;The housing issues; housing for seniors (affordable and safe) ;Why affordable housing was not implemented earlier so that poor people who are being forced to move out of their apartments and  homes would have somewhere decent to go;To have affordable housing that is not under homeowner associations. ;I like to see more housing for the community;More affordable housing, caring, less homelessness. Why are you going and rebuilding in the black neighborhoods;Affordable housing should be a right and we should have it in Durham;More accessible housing in all areas of the city (decent and safe);housing crisis;housing instability;Look into H.O.P.E model that provides service and gives ownership back to the community. Location Fayetteville;Why was the former Fayetteville street project site not included in the recent bond package that we voted on?;More affordable mixed income housing in the same areas - not just projects for low income;need more low and moderate income housing;handicapped accessible housing increased. Do not isolate in areas but in a mixed area with few children, consider ground build units;Better housing conditions and not just consider the economic view.;Durham has its ups and down. The main issue at hand is they are doing a terrible job with taking care of their people. Public Housing is terrible and the living environment.;more affordable homes to live in;Affordable Housing increased taxed gentrification;Housing and living more affordable in areas that aren't so high in crime.;People who have lived in older neighborhoods permitted to return to those neighborhoods to live in clean, safe, affordable housing ;What will interim steps toward providing affordable housing for wage workers earning between $19-17/hr. look like? ;Oxford Manor should be fixed up for either new houses or a bigger park for the people to enjoy;Empty land is not being used, but keep tearing down trees to build newer model houses (ex: Fayetteville st, Highway 55, Highway 54);Affordable Housing;AFFORDABLE HOUSING - INCOME BASED! ;Housing;Affordable Housing    ;affordable housing;My only concern about Durham now is the housing. Seems people cannot tell the difference between affordable housing and low-income housing. I have folks moving into these luxury dwellings and at the same time I have folks being moved out of DHA to hotels. Why not just subsidize DHA folks and have them move into some of these newer dwellings. ;More affordable housing with unique approaches like co-living, small homes, rent control etc. ;Affordable Housing: increased number of new home purchases available at price affordable by lower and middle income families;Reasonable and affordable housing for families;Better housing conditions for disadvantaged citizens.;Affordable housing  ;It was inspection done by HUD (3) years ago.;Affordable Housing -- Too Expensive for Low income;DHIC;Families are sleeping in parks.;Affordable housing has to be *integrated* - can't be isolated and stuck there forever. Look at cooperative, integrated models. ;Need ways to lift people out of poverty, to move up from project housing. ;Need to throw out old model of project housing. ;Luxury apartments - who is living in them? ;Living in senior living. DHIC. Need more senior living apartments. There are not enough. Needs to be ;Affordable housing. Why so many luxury housing downtown. people can't afford;More affordable housing for seniors, in good condition, rent under 1k. Fixed income minimum wage, they can't afford to stay - could fix homelessness;More affordable houses for the poor to afford.;Housing that is affordable all citizens no matter the income restrictions and can each citizen progress for with housing and home ownership.;Less homelessness please;Who will lose their homes?;I lost my house I was renting because owner had to sell;Make things, especially housing, more affordable;Concerned about affordable housing. Concerned about displaced families, not being replaced into housing at all or in the same community.;Affordable housing concerns;Homelessness  - more resources;Affordable housing ;Rent is going up;Affordable housing ;Homeless rate high;Affordable housing (mixed income);Lack of affordable housing;Durham housing authority lack of responsibility;Increasing cost of housing and displacement of residents;Need affordable housing;Homelessness - due to unaffordable housing, skills, jobs, etc.;Housing for the elderly, safe travel for the elderly, housing affordability for seniors, placement of senior housing;Current housing being built - expensive, stop destruction of certain neighborhoods;Homeless population is a growing concern;Move community living areas for seniors and that are not high-rise areas;Building too many apartments now!;Was housing affordable in past communities they lived in? Majority said yes, 2 said no. Most are here over 20 years!;multicultural residential with affordable housing for all;affordable housing for all. Schools system is in the top 5.;Affordable Housing community programs, Education, Home owners on up keep of their home.;Home ownership For Low income;Bigger funds for Housing;more apartments catering to bigger families;more programs for the youth of Housing;more housing developments;People in my community don't want to sell homes. See rising prices, get letters everyday asking to sell, decides to keep their homes to children, want to keep community, family, youth find direction - set up communities where we can bring youth if we don't;Displacement of poor people with in housing complex;What's going on with the Affordable Housing?;Affordable Housing for EVERYONE!;Wi-Fi Access for Public Housing.;Poor maintenance to the homes out here; poor service to request when needing something fixed.;Not to tear down income drin and low-income housing developments.;Giving low income families more and better opportunities for these so called affordable houses and developments that have *bad* to *good* credit.;Help families learn how to become homeowners instead of having to be displaced and create incentives, programs, those that are below 35,000 a year. ;Lessen units in Housing authorities developments where section 8 and low income families live and make more developments centered around Durham keeping up with the look of modern apartments and homes and this could help project a better image, not only to the neighboring communities but image of family and families. Sometime if thing's look better, people may feel better. ;more affordable housing (for blacks);I would like to see more affordable housing ;We need affordable housing for lower to middle class people.;I think the additional funds for the comprehensive plan should be used to make accommodations for the residents neglected by DHA.;Finding ways to house displaced the residents ;What is our city council and our city government doing to create more equitable situations for housing and big tax increases for older people on fixed incomes?;As I get older I want to be independent for as long as possible, don’t’ have family to rely on as vision is degenerating – alternatives for living, 55 plus; 55 plus places low end of income scale (less than $25k/year) or very expensive for an apartment; something in the middle affordable for visually impaired elderly folks, not affordable options even with a roommate, affordable housing for “the growing wisers”  ;Affordable housing ;Proximity of affordable housing being downtown, individuals with lower income are being pushed out of the downtown area, would like to see a mixture of affordable housing close to the downtown area, where they can walk to and don’t have to rely on Durham access and DATA ;Housing needs to happen, affordable or elderly or wisely growing people, state had a targeted housing program, units specifically for people with disabilities not based on age and income, available for people with disabilities ;Affordable Housing.;More affordable housing  ;Feels like certain parts of Durham stay stagnant, fix low income housing;Homelessness is a big issue - make housing more affordable - give people avenues to get out of homelessness;Better, more affordable housing;Housing;Housing. Affordable;Make affordable housing a priority;"City Government" must make affordable housing a priority;Affordable housing;Develop the Fayetteville corridor as affordable housing - actually do it! ;Affordable housing is a strong issue. People need to be able to afford to live in this city. Those whose income is at a low scale as well as a high scale. The have not are not being included. ;Housing Projects - need to be torn down and redone to code. ;How to buy house? Affordable housing? For low income people. ;An ideal Durham includes affordable housing, safer neighborhoods, and a better kept city. ;The city of Durham is aware of the present housing crisis where low income families do not have adequate and acceptable living conditions and health outcomes are declining because of it. ;Programs that are fair and honest to help Blacks own their homes in Durham.;Affordable housing for poor and middle class people; black home ownership;affordable housing;affordable housing ;home buying programs;housing for all;better quality housing for DHA residents;less fortunate still able to live in humane conditions, unlike what's happening in DHA;homebuyer home rehabilitation programs to help people buy, keep and rehab their homes;ensuring veterans have adequate housing and care;more assistance to help people with starter homes;housing assistance for people with disabilities;more housing options;tiny house communities;housing for all;affordable housing ;invest in more housing for the poor and the homeless;incentives to landlords to control rent;housing is unaffordable;Who benefits from the Housing bond and who does not?;Durham public housing crisis has implications like Flint, Katrina;housing is way too expensive;costs way too much to live in Durham. No justification for cost of housing. Housing assistance programs offered are a joke;Why did DHA CEO get a raise and bonus when it has been well known that DHA properties are in disrepair? What is someone working for DHA earning almost $200,000 and year;If you want to buy a home in Durham, Northern Durham is practically the only affordable area;I work in Durham but cannot afford to live here. Rent control is needed;Housing for mental health and drug user that want treatment -free;big old buildings could work;In 15 year would be more affordable housing even though they continue to remodel. ;There are *so* many people that could have a "stable" home if Durham would focus on the ("lower class") living situations. ;Affordable housing;Dislike: Landlord tenant laws: *Laws are in favor of the landlord*;Habitat for Humanity: Better job of helping those that need and more accessible. ;An ideal Durham is a safe community that has affordable housing for all. Durham's school system is steadily increasing meaning that schools are a lot better than they are now. ;Landlord tenant laws are unfair. ;Affordable Housing;Make 2 bedroom $700 again;Nothing. Fixing up Bands (Abandoned Houses) so people can be able to rent. ;XYZ is a bad landlord! ;Who is holding landlords accountable? Auditing their finances, their maintenance? Why are they still renting properties out with lead paint and mold? ;Abolishing rent application fees;Public Housing with supportive services;Affordable Housing;worst landlord and tenant laws;If no money to appeal, a slum landlord can evict you. Even legal aid doesn't help like they should.;Lots of abandoned houses- need to pay people to fix them - create jobs.;Long-term housing and jobs;Durham Housing Market;Need different types of shelter - you leave but you still have housing and job security.;Stoves that residents had to use at DHA;All public housing needs to be renovated ;New housing plans for public housing residents- (select plans from the best models in other cities) or move these residents into the greater community (not packing them all together as currently done);DHA - if we continue in federal perspective of continuing to pull money; affordable for whom? ensure we have empathy, sympathy for people they're serving;Section 8 development within housing detail.;Affordable Housing;Housing or more places or incentives put in for homeless, veteran and students.;Braggtown evictions;Even with gentrification, conditions people who are low-income live in are still really poor. 1 home near Hoover rd. back in the woods, in a trailer-cast iron furnace, looked like a hurricane had gone through and another place off queen St.-women's shelter, canal St., cheek rd. apartments, McDougald Terrace, dropped off food at a red roof inn- didn't have a home, 9 yr. old answered the door, mom wasn't home, housing projects off Elizabeth St.- wouldn't have had food if we didn't come;homeownership is key to generated wealth. but our focus is on rental units?;public housing needs to be more interactive. residents need to give back!;affordable: housing, proximity, mobility, public transit, light rail;Better housing especially for the elderly;Suggested use for Grant funds: Build a housing complex for children in foster care.;Adequate housing for everyone not just for the rich and the middle class;Affordable housing is a must.;Housing with no one homeless, every human being will have decent shelter and food to eat.;The continuous increases on rent. We did not ask for the new developments ;Housing  ;in house but not in prison;Affordable housing and living wages. ;Representation on City Council needs to reflect demographics of City--low income, all sexual orientations, someone with these experiences.;Bring more women to the table--Development Meetings;Bringing directly impacted people to the table to make decisions on homelessness, hunger and transportation.;inclusion and transparency;people from different backgrounds working together and truly caring for each other;Its imperative that the cityand developers must focus on population and demographics and ensure diversity inclusion. In essence, project should be based on the needs as well as the people of the community.;More citizens input with the rebuilding and restoring of Durham;A place that accommodates all diverse groups in housing, jobs, finances in fair and just ways. ;A place not divided by race, class or income.;Have a representative for every section of Durham, even the homeless.;Have a representative from every community in the meeting.;There should be a representative from every area in Durham.;strong political voice (Transparent in community wants and  needs);Representation is lacking - we need to address the issue of utilization of Durham has to offer;Durham needs to honor the historical contribution of African Americans in a real tangible way that center equity in any major plans and respects native Durham voice and experiences;New businesses coming to Durham target a certain population but not black people. Advertise more free events.;While people are now investing more in Durham. More people of color in meetings that decide what happens. Loves more people of color. Share more history;Durham looks feel and is for everyone. Durham is safe for all residents in all areas. Durham political figures are in the community and seen. Durham should have safe affordable housing and families should be able to live their best life. Ideal Durham like progression without isolation!;Welcoming to all cultures by hosting different events as well as different art work around the town;Diverse!!;About time Durham includes citizens on planning this city!;Will we still be divided in the good and bad - wealthy and poor neighborhoods?;Less segregation among ethnic groups;Community mindset;More inclusion;Concerned about how involved city officials really are. How are the major changes for all, not just the rich? Durham is growing, but excludes the less fortunate. ;Diverse, inclusive;Hope the city remembers all of its residents as it progresses;Lack of blacks in healthcare;Getting information out to seniors;Everyone included.;Love the inclusivity of Durham;Be a city for everyone.;Allow County to vote for City officials. Their taxes and environment is affected by their decisions.;County can't vote? Yet we are affected;6 Voter election and registration;County people being able to vote on city matters that affect them. (if you live outside city limits. ) ;Inclusive: more equal distribution of funds (and equitable);Everyone in Durham should have a place to stay, not just for the rich. Poor people love Durham also.;inclusivity;Smooth sidewalks and good street lights.;With all the development there aren't enough sidewalks.;There are bicycle lanes so you should have sidewalks.;There should be a mandate for sidewalks.;No sidewalks. We walk on the street.;congestion on major expressways (RIP)!;delayed repair of inner city streets, especially after major storms and flooding;Remove heavy traffic congestion;Citywide Sidewalks;additional road work needed to be worked on and stop signs are needed in various areas;better sidewalks;better streets and roads;Sidewalks and storm drains on Cook Road;speed bumps on Cook Road especially near our driveway (Fitts Powell apts.);Remove debris from Cook Road and MLK Blvd;Infrastructure (roads) for lower neighborhoods pushed further from downtown Durham;better streets;A place where we see the true effects of our tax dollars. Schooling, road development, etc.;Better roads;duration of construction on streets and bridges;Fix Potholes;Trees plant and preserve, Transportation- Street repair. Improve Parks, Zoning? Reduce amount of allowed hard scape, Real Estate Taxes - freeze for elderly without debt on their dwelling. Communication on water sewer bill.;Traffic 3 road development is ridiculous! Alston and Fayetteville and 147;Potholes;Also a better water and sewer services;Traffic light needed at church entrance;The city's infrastructure needs to be redeveloped to include a better public transportation method. ;Expanded connections between highways;lighting on roadways;More places for free parking;Better Roads - Pot holes - BAD;Cleaner streets;better lighting throughout the city;Street Repairs and Maintenance;Equitable attention to infrastructure and road conditions in all neighborhoods;Streets are BAD;Pot holes, bad roads;Need more sidewalks, benches, parks, etc. for walking;More stop lights;Sewer problem - neglect of city officials;Better sewer system;Problem with the city concerning sewer issues. Personnel very negligent. ;More parking and it should be free.;need to fix Roads and streets;Better parking around Durham;Fix the roads in low income areas!;Nice roads everywhere.;Steel plates ruined car. Who pays for car work after there's a damage.;Potholes in Durham N. Roxboro Street, NC 54, Alston Ave, Club and Duke Regional, Avondale. Potholes everywhere in Durham. Why do we pay for property taxes for cars when the streets are still horrible;4. Road signs;Good water: something's going on with the water and sewer systems, they're starting to deteriorate and crumble;improved streets (potholes);relined street markings;fix the pot holes;more connecting trails and bike paths;more street lights and stop lights;investment in infrastructure (roads, highways);Roads unprepared for increased traffic; poorly designed roads;I wouldn't have sidewalks by my house at all if the City wasn't widening road;Fayetteville St to Fayetteville Rd is too congested due to growth of NCCU and Durham in general;The city routed roads right through my neighborhood;It took almost 20 years to get street lights;Parking is terrible all over Durham; 147 is too congested;Better roads, pot holes fixed;Check all roads for potholes, especially downtown and surrounding areas.;Nothing at this time. The roads are a mess also minimal shelters for people that really need it. ;Fix more roads;Roxboro Road is terrible;Terrible roads;late because of traffic;Government fixes the roads on their own time. Some roads in some neighborhoods don't get fixes.;In an ideal Durham, pedestrians, cyclists, and drivers would have access to connect their homes to their needs and entertainment with roads that are appropriate for every need.;Construction of sidewalks and bike paths in low-income areas.;Street lighting on city streets and on Hwy 85 and Hwy 70 pedestrian bridges;Construction of sidewalks in city neighborhoods;Extend the Hwy 85 South access road at exit 179 (E. Club Blvd), as traffic has increased and there have been near collisions of cars entering Hwy 85;Rebuild the E. Club Blvd road section between Roxboro St. and Hwy 85;Fix 85;The roadway has holes everywhere. Where do taxes go? But at Dulce, (Duke?) the streets are paved with asphalt.;The number of lanes was reduced to only one vehicle lane in order to add a bicycle lane, but bicycle traffic is almost nonexistent. When I asked, they said people walk on the side of the road.;Unlit bridges over Hwy 85;In the area where I live—Holloway St. and Cheek Rd.—there are no sidewalks.;Heavy traffic (semi-trucks) goes through.;Junction Rd. Announce participation in the plan.;Valley Terrace entrance. Install speed bumps between sidewalk entrances.;Streets in good condition and pothole-free;More sidewalks ;Streets that need repair;Now there is more traffic down and around Ninth St. Streets have not been repaired in South Durham.;Streets are in very poor condition.;Sidewalks  ;Old East Durham - No street improvement for 6 years; rent went up, evictions;seeing genuine interest and  concern from the city about improving under- served communities -backed with more funding;more grants to improve black and brown areas of Durham;Money being spent in the wrong places;Local working collaborations from local, private, and communities to look and invest inside Durham;lack of programs or lack of fund for programs. parents are putting money into taxes but money isn't being used properly.;More black investment ;Self help is a joke.;Reinvest in community.; invest in the development of people as much as property;investment in getting people back on their feet;Place more money with homeless families and more affordable housing. ;There is a certain segment of Durham that is insular, exclusive and DISINTERESTED in the plight of the unwashed proletariat. No more studies! ;Has 6 kids from fam of nine- lifelong Durham Resident. There is so much to do in Durham, but my kids are cut off from these things. Barriers are both financial and emotional. ;Native Durham residents being left out of the city's progress -- Stagville Plantation descendants --rebuilding of communities destroyed by 147;Durham is great just not for everyone.;A Durham that is for all people, NOT JUST THE RICH!!!;They are letting people who don't live in Durham make decisions about how to live in Durham.;no local news is given anymore has moved away people who are not born here are building here or coming here sharing their ideas;Can't be mad at people moving in;Too much attention given to those coming and moving to Durham instead of us that live here;New job population hired by Durham people;Investing in people from Durham;More accommodating for the native people of Durham. Opportunities for local residents to establish business instead of out of state companies.;I still feel like an outsider after living here for 10 years.;It is getting harder for native Durhamites to afford to live in Durham;Durham utilizes too many contracts that have no ties to the city and overlook people who have been here for decades. Why would someone a corporation that isn't from here and has no roots here? What's in the community's best interest?;Native Durhamites being pushed out;People who come from here.;The prettiest thing in McDougald right now is balloons from a vigil.;McDougald Terrace dealing with a short term Band-Aid effect without long term solution;What is the long term fix for McDougald Terrace in the 2 year period;Who exactly owns McDougald Terrace and how will it be continually funded;what's going to happen to McDougald Terrace residents in the long run?;Public Housing - McDougald Housing;Hospital being the plan to replace McDougald Terrace;McDougald Terrace Situation;I think the communication of the needs of *Housing* in Durham like McDougal Terrace and other Housing should not have happened.;McDougald Terrace - terrible situation. DHA need better communication with people living there. How did this happen?;McDougald Terrace - plan to tear down - what are we going to do with  the people. ;Maintenance of affordable housing (McDougald Terrace);What are long term developments on kids from the "gas" at the McDougald community?;Concerned about the people in McDougald Terrace. How does something like this happen?;Will the actually fix the crises in the McDougald Terrace, Do they really care?;The McDougald terrace ordeal and the displacement of black and Brown people through overpricing and evictions. It really sucks to see!;Community Emergency response plan. - McDougald Terrace issue.;no unacceptable living conditions, e.g. no McDougald Terrace situations;One example of the displacement of residents of McDougald Terrace and deaths of some of their babies. ;McDougald Terrace situation was strategic;McDougald Terrace situation sheds light on several issues in Durham. There are still areas in Durham terribly lacking and there is still a divide in the City;Durham is geared toward the rich. Over look or ignore middle and lower classes ;More equality for the middle class which is becoming extinct;more black own businesses;Why not create more business for the blacks;There should be more businesses of color.;Entrepreneurship for female business owners.;Business Loans and grants to start small businesses of color.;Market information for black families. Director of black business. Examine barriers to include all families. Be serious about addressing transportation to service and programs;More dollars for black business;More black business downtown;More black owned business, more grants to help 1st time home buyers, incentives to live in the "downtown" for minorities, grants to help business owners;More Black owned business;What is being done to expand black owned and brown owned businesses in the city? ; How do we encourage diverse and minority business ownership in our city? ;Black Wall Street-- What happened to it? How do we bring it back?;Bring back black wall street.;Black owned businesses apply to start businesses. Black Wall Street or low interest rate loans for businesses. ;Black business support plan. Look @ New York model for supporting small business. ;for minority entrepreneurs, let them do pop-up shops in vacant buildings that have resources too - business counseling, etc.;Entrepreneurs - pop up shops available for Black entrepreneurs (PPL who were redlined in the past - can't receive loans or resources);Not enough Black businesses downtown or in other areas of Durham.;utilization of black owned contractors, businesses, consultation firms, etc.;utilizing black farmers; funding them;support for black farmers, entrepreneurs, etc.;build more multi purpose buildings (i.e. doctors offices), currently quality differs in neighborhood, economical pieces (don't use the same products in higher income area);A comfortable, clean environment.;Clean air, water, better sewage.;Less pollution;clean air, clean water;wildlife preservation;Is the water and air safe?;Transportation needs to be a lot better. The roads are causing havoc on the environment and I feel as if an Ideal Durham slow down on building so many buildings that are harming nature's habitat. ;No more cutting down trees;Environmental pollution;It's striking to see the city change so rapidly. The transition has been absolutely mind blowing.;Neighborhood renovations in areas that desperately need it;Take exception to those who have been in the neighborhood for *years*, but do not even do the minimum to keep their property up-- not even mow the lawn. When someone who comes along who will be *better* why should you be allowed to stay? Change is inevitable--change WITH IT! Those who complain without exerting themselves are part of the problem. ;Beautification;Beautification in all areas;Want peaceful and calm neighborhoods and nice (like 1982) for seniors;Less congestion: more living spaces with yards; more restaurants and food options; entertainment;Community cleanup efforts in low income neighborhoods.;More repairs to structures in place.;Keeping black communities in place, along with affordable housing.;Want historically black areas to stay black;less trash;more mixed income neighborhoods;sound barriers in residential areas with heavy traffic and construction;The priorities are all wrong, we're stepping on feces in MacDougal Terrace.;less poverty stricken areas;There are *two* Durham-- one flourishing, me struggling. I hope I am having some kind of positive effect. ;Help the poor;poverty;Why are all of the liquor stores, tobacco shops, pawn shops, plasma donation centers all in poor neighborhoods;Whenever you try to better they take everything from you so people float right at the surface and stay stuck;poor people are subsidizing the needs of other poor people;Positives: great clubs;Ways to improve negatives: more community centers;better gym facilities;Want more inclusion, community involvement, community event (carnivals, festivals, free community events with vendors, more activities for youth (both in each neighborhood and downtown)) Example for event in Braggtown = big public cookout with games, music, free to the public;Events that bring people together of all colors;community space for neighborhood organization and events, no credit cards, clear contract, information that is the same across the system;process and procedures when obtaining community space needs to be reexamined;Department of Recreation charging for facilities when shelters needs to be repaired, new grills, picnic tables with possibilities bathrooms.;Concerns about new library and the homeless population nearby;What is the location to organize and the space to do neighborhood space;Need to make the process for using community spaces easier to use. No credit cards, clear contact info that is the same across the system;more everything (recreation area);need more recreational facilities for all and better publicity about what is available;Shopping: Markets, retail;Park things that draw community (jazz and music and people);Friendly events for everyone;more events happening with children;school bus routes and public transportation more for residential parks for children and neighborhoods.;Programs targeting many groups non-homogenous programming. Education for those in temporary housing apartments.;need funding to come into our neighborhood. community center;"community center" but nothing happens there! (franklin village);Negatives: not a lot of places to hang out;more skate parks;More events for all people;A center for business and family.;culture, Bulls, proximity to Charlotte;There are all kinds of cultural and sports activities available in Durham-- but ONLY for the affluent. How come HIS children don't get to see shows at DPAC or Durham Bulls games? Make it a *reward* for attendance and grades. Support the kids who seek to excel in SPITE of what may be happening at the HOUSE. ;13 year resident LOVEs the City of Durham. Loves the culture, sports, proximity to Raleigh and Charlotte. ;How can we make opportunities for low-wealth people to enjoy the cultural offerings in Durham: American Underground, DPAC, and Durham Bulls?;Night life;Major League;Community centers to help families and the youth;More events at DPAC;Night life with things to do from arts, sports, music, family life, low crime, affordable housing;More programs for families;Community based centers for families;a state of the art convention center;More recreation for kids and parks, games, etc.;Safe spaces for our children to play and engage with one another. Outdoor space and parks that also accessible to children with disabilities.;Business and citizens coming together to have outdoor and indoor events that help each other to get to know our local business and fellow citizens.;Parks, restaurants within walking distance.;More dog parks;Place to have musical show - like coliseum. DPAC too small.;More recreational facilities for all ages.;More things for youth to do - open rec centers, after school (no cost);Durham Bulls;parades;Festivals;More rec centers;Community event - dances, cookouts, outings;Funding prevent community events - more assistance, available funds;More parks that are updated (no lights);City activities;recreation centers;Programs for kids are non-existent;Full of culture, entertainment, and activity for all citizens;More attractions for citizens and visitors, namely sports attractions;Children - not enough things for children;Promote positive activities;Recreation parks - update;Safe house - children learn how to play chess;Promote more talent in Durham (seniors, churches, neighborhoods);Need more convenient shopping centers, more middle schools (public) and more restaurant.;Diversified living spaces for all people: more integration throughout Durham; more employment opportunities; more options for kids then arts music production then career paths; more music festivals.;More welcoming to all: less violence; creative spaces for kids; better public schools and education; better HS athletics; productive creative places for seniors (activities);play and recreational spaces for kids; improved public schools ;Before and After school Project.;more Programs for dads;Big brother and sister for children in community;more recreation centers for children and adults everywhere;better parks and recreation;Better animal control and activities for pet owners;Nice parks for the kids.;More recreation equipment for the community center.;Not enough welcoming places for blacks. More entertainment spaces for blacks.;There are lots of beer breweries and dogs in them. Its gross.;Build more parks and another mall  ;Open more boys and girls clubs  ;If a building is developed, activities for folks to be more active as they get older ;More money in parks in recreation – more parks opened up that they have closed down ;Raleigh DPR has transportation through parks and rec for folks with disabilities ;Durham- Zoo (more activities for kids) fishing for ;Everyday activities to keep kids out of trouble. ;More activities Downtown or club or lounge for everyone;DPR better outreach to low income areas. More programs.;A way so businesses can collaborate to have family style land (Pullen Park) Durham deciding what they want to have for families.;A better and New mall;New parks because current ones are not good;Increase places for all people to be creative; paint stations, museums, free dance centers, community centers;Some parks are dangerous;Add more attractions to Durham - social places for teenagers to go;More fun activities, amusement parks, parks, malls, arcades;safer parks;More places with nature, hike trails, dog parks, gardens;A greater focus on the arts, more theaters, more art and statues around Durham, more museums, dance studios;I think new and cool tourist sites and places to go for fun would be nice.;Durham in the future will have more fun activities to do and we will be more resourceful and it won't gloomy anymore.;More parks and shopping malls. ;New mall;Better parks;Arts;Walltown Recreation Center;Arts;Everyone don't shop online. There still needs to be places where people can go shop and eat and have entertainment;Need more programs for poor and middle class families; community centers, before and after school programs, home ownership, better parks, more black culture events in different areas of Durham and downtown, keep Northgate open.;More places like Northgate for shopping, eating, and entertainment;Better parks and bus stops;We need water parks in Durham, we need a football stadium in the county and more places for youth programs to be able to play;I would like to see a place that has all types of games for kids like PlayStation 5, super bowl 55, new and old pinball games, games like they have on the mobile bus, place where kids and young people can go;better promotion of activities available;more malls;more nightlife, more 24 hours locations;free access to public space;Free museum access;updated community centers;amphitheater;recreational areas (skate parks, parks);more sponsored activities in the parks;more outdoor basketball courts;more public pools;city sponsored street ball leagues;There's a lot to do in Durham but often its not well advertised;Durham needs a semi-pro sports team;Free Rec Centers;Southpoint Mall;More options for multicultural night life. ;Too much racism;Raising my black child in city and county that values my black child;black people in Durham are not progressing;Racism;No to racism against Hispanics;Better commuting resources to get to surrounding cities easier. Bus charges dropped?;Another Raleigh;More available resources;More resources  ;It's hard to be in the know about opportunities (e.g. grants). They should email all nonprofits registered to the state about grants and opportunities. ;Youth - Reach out to nonprofits registered with state in Durham. Help them be aware of resources available. ;Funding and grants for blacks to own homes and businesses;Like most about Durham: If you're having housing food or employment issues resources are available. ;Good: More resources here. People here are a lot friendlier.;Resources;I don't like living in Durham. However, there are many different resources here for Durham residents. ;Expenses I've had in Durham that are good due to the fact that I have encountered many resources. Bad experiences are the fact that there are lots of crimes here and it really isn't safe. ;More available access to resources and knowledge.;Better access to other resources;Need more programs to help us;Driver's licenses for all;I think that the City has everything in terms of basic needs.;Negatives: too many killings;Negatives: gangs;Negatives: gun violence;More happiness, less violence;neighborhood watches;How can we prevent the violence that going on in our community?;When people are shot, no elected officials come out.;The firefighters have bulletproof vests.;Gun violence;homicides;Safe space for everyone;safe, inclusive, progressive;Safer Durham, crime would cease;Safer community for all;A safe, beautiful atmosphere and everyone getting along. It should be a place where all races and nationalities can gather and enjoy being together and get along. ;I think Durham is a big City and I'm afraid to walk around so maybe "Help" Buttons to make it safe.;Safer and easy access to bus line.;daytime shootings. people say they aren't taking their kids to the park;Negatives: too many shootings;Owner of corner convenient store would like to see less young people walking through store and parking lot with guns and selling drugs;Place to move about freely without fear. ;Violence in the city;Better security with crime areas;Durham has failed over the years from where it was to now. It is no longer safe or a clean city;Residents feel safe and are excited about living here. Residents have a good quality of life. ;Violence;Safer communities;Safer- Safe to walk and Drive;Scary for older people;Safe Communities;Less Violence ;safety and security;Safety (Violent Crimes killing, shooting, etc.);Safety for our children and families. ;I do not feel safe;Safer environment;Safety with all the violence. Do more for the youth, especially the black community. Update the parks. Get more activities going for the youth so they'll stay out of trouble.;No more fighting in front of Liberty Street;Less violence;A place where more than the wealthy can enjoy a safe and healthy place to live;Safe, affordable with opportunities for all people;Safety of Durham - increase police presence (populated areas), elderly also live in these areas;Concerns about safety in communities;Patrol using drones for safety;Need "safer" areas for seniors to keep from being afraid to leave home. Need a safer Durham for seniors. We all (you) are going to get old!;Stop gun violence!;Safe streets, more races [involved] in community government.;Need more equal opportunity for people--andreduce the violence, homelessness, provide jobs for needy and improve housing development.;As a child, it was scary to be downtown after dark. Now it seems to be the highlife. It is also highly expensive to live in Durham.;A city of no violence, small business flourish, keeping Durham diverse, school system in the top 5, parking downtown Durham.;Equality, safer neighborhoods, and overall crime. Also, more funding in public schools and teacher and educators salary. ;I picture unsafe parks, expensive housing downtown. Rundown areas to raise your family.;It's not safe.;Safe for all.;Some street are to dark and unsafe at night.;Community Watch.;a city that isn't seen by outside people as dangerous ;Strict on dogs;Roads should be safe to drive and the environment should be trash free. ;I just want to feel safe in our city.;I want it to be more safer and that it will be a better place for people to live. ;Use technology more, e.g. I can look at my Ring app and see where gunshots were fired. Let's patrol those areas and really get to the main root of the problem-- do education, workshops, create job opportunities. ;Safety and Crime - Increase task force - use ring and other - use technology more - get crime under control!;Safer neighborhood;Human trafficking - then  ? What are we doing are we safe? What can we do to combat this issue.;Safer;protection of trans community;more community involvement in public safety;There is a sense of fear overshadowing Durham which is unfortunate;safe neighborhoods - police presence - more;Shootings everywhere - not safe for my kids gang activity nearby;Too many sexual predators.;Everything would be well lit.;More security;More security in apartments and shops;Increase in violence in Latino apartments and stores (recent);Also, the security in the area could use some help but I'm unsure how to improve or make it better. ;Durham isn't safe, City parks aren't safe. Crime, shootings, "Violence, Other people are afraid to come to Durham, Building a new look for Durham.;Negatives about Durham: The school system isn't as great as it use to be.;How to improve the negatives: Teachers need to be more equipped for school systems.;Better classes in the school system like more about mental health and sex ed.;Teachers and students should be helped.;Literacy and education, not just for kids, free of charge.;inequities in education;Durham Public Schools are not highly regarded. How will this be addressed?; more support for teachers and  better principals;working with minority teachers to keep them. Too much paperwork for teachers, not enough support for them;We should also keep kids in school. They need to enforce truancy officers again;Start introducing budgeting and how to start a business for the young teen children. How can we help educate young children about drugs.;Start teaching budgeting and how to start a business;Keep kids in school;More community gardens for everybody. Need to start teaching the youth budgeting and how to start a business. I feel like this is a racial thing. What are you doing in Durham to keep the kids in school. How can we help educate the young kids to stop selling drugs;Can we enforce truancy officers again for kids who stay out of school;How we keep kids in school?;Education should be accessible for everyone. ;Start introducing budgeting and finance; how to start a business.;money distribution for students accessibility to equal education.;Schools need to be upgraded;Curious about the schools and rezoning plans.;More black awareness. Better classes in the school system like more about mental health and sex ed. Teachers and students should be held accountable. More staff for teens, more basketball courts. Employ more adults for after church programs.;The school system isn't good. hard for younger people to find jobs. ;college students be more involved with high school students;more money for schools and small businesses ;Better Pre K programs;Before and After school programs;How do we engage youth 7 seminars with youth. DPS students should take economics and finance classes!;NC perk -  education for all toddlers and children.;Positives: teachers do care (some);Negatives: school system;programs between DPS high schools and colleges in Durham (mentoring programs);More focus on teachers, youth, elderly;Teach and educate low-income tenants life and coping skills;More Focus on voter education. Educate young voters that is critical to participate in all elections not just the U.S. president election.;Monies for continuing education;Education to stop viewing our kids as numbers and commodities.;Our schools are segregated again, how can we fix that?;More Educations Youth Lead Programs;Education;more funding and support for public (NOT Charter) schools.;eliminate public school truancy and expulsion rates (address the root causes of the problems;Parents having a better understanding of the important of education;Need skills training, crafts things to do. Need to be affordable or free.;Go straight from school to programs, business training.;Could do German model when apprenticeships are an alternative to 4 year college;Schools having equal funds and materials and equipment.;Better schools - teachers paid more.;Improvement in public school system;Schools are different - better quality teachers;Better teachers;School system evaluation - pay of teachers;A place with outstanding schools;Vocational education be reinstalled in Durham community;Need of guidance for finance, entrepreneurship, illiterate;All schools are equal and all public schools, grocery stores with all local farmers produce and livestock, unemployment for work is lower.;Great schools; local farmers in grocery stores, affordable housing, a great transit system. ;Educational Programs for Families. ;Curriculums for felons to get on their feet;more trainings and and or scholarships;Programs for disabled people (to go back to school, or just hands on activities to keep busy);more and better schools;Paying teachers what they deserve to increase the quality. The curriculum in schools is terrible. Student learns more during summer than in school. ;Better schools for underrepresented children.;More education for jobs skills for training;No lottery;Better schools;More campus for Durham tech;I would like to see more school options for all ages.;I would like to see more of the Lottery money used for education purpose. ;Decent neighborhoods and schools  ;High schools not really preparing students for college but always tell students they should  ;A city of Durham scholarship to help residents with school expenses while at school  ;Improve Durham public schools. higher pay for teachers. Make DPS like Voyager.;Alternative school for kids with disabilities. Down's Syndrome child shouldn't be in formal school. He needs more assistance to help him.;Improve Education system in Durham. -higher pay.;Universal Pre K and afterschool care. ;Extend school hours.;Training African American males on civic engagement ;programs for afterschool recreation and academic;Services[?] in school to help people deal and accept emotion;More funding for schools in general should help;At my old school, teachers would yell at students for disagreeing. One teacher gave our entire grade silent lunch for a month, which we didn't do. One teacher didn't give my friend a quarter grade because he procrastinate. A lot of teachers moves to better areas for money.;I came to Durham to complete some training at Durham tech.;Better schools: more focus on understanding the material, and not just memorizing dates, formulas, or laws. ;Actually focused and helpful computer programming classes. I have never taken one I couldn't have replaced with a week of online classes.;Higher teacher pay. Smart people don't take crap jobs. ;We need to put better people in our schools. (Incident of Wake County school, where officer brutalized a student);Education;7. Ed and Lottery;Recent grad programs? Are there any? Let people know?;Training for parenting, behavioral ;Training for recovering addicts;Training for teachers on how to deal with problem students;More equitable resources for schools;Move support for HBCUs (NCCU) from Durham City and County. Even the parking lots at places like Shaw or UNC don't have holes;Some companies don't even want to work with NCCU students - we need to have someone come in and train them how they can excel in these environments;Transportation; Housing; Education - good schools but all are not being afforded the same attention.;Support for HBCUs: Duke and UNC are well promoted and invested in;Support for HBCUs: companies do not want to work with NCCU students. ;Before and after school programs;better pre-k program;stronger education system (higher ed and trade);education;equitable access to education. NO lottery;access to vocational education and trades;GED programs;more community partnership with Durham Tech, Duke, NCCU;destroy school to prison pipeline;more educational options such as charter schools;more educational opportunities for adult to expand their knowledge;all universities should offer employee development opportunities;better educational opportunities;community programs to assist people with learning computer programs;literacy for all citizens;all schools should have access to same resources (healthy food, technology, school nurses, etc.);financial literacy resources to teach people how to build generational wealth;partner with duke, nccu, Durham tech for continuing education programs that are income based and free;more community events to bring the area colleges together;more Duke and NCCU partnerships;teachers are not paid enough;What is being done to address the education gap?;summer training and  job training programs like they use to have at Durham Tech.  and  Rec Centers;Affordable education for children and adults;Safer schools and affordable education for adults.;Quality education and affordable. ;Better schools;Quality education for children and adults - trades, I Tech;Education for adults ;Know about grant programs for school;Financial literacy classes;Job readiness and school prep and Parenting classes ;Teachers not burned out and not being paid;At the schools, there are empty pill bottles in the school yard. ;Not enough school security- you can just walk in syringes on the ground.;Depending on where you live, schools are maintained with the income.;There are two schools in the area, Merrick Moore and Southern.;ESL Teacher that can understand the language of the kids coming from all over the world;Help Schools ;Copy the ideas of López Obrador (President of Mexico): Give people the opportunity to “become experienced.” Teach the unemployed, the recently graduated and the homeless a trade. We believe that (government) public housing is very good, but people need to have a job.;there should be some black and ethnic people in the community for teachers. there should not be teachers going to other states in order to teach school. A lot of teachers have gone to other states. ;More news in the community needs to get out to the senior community such as morning glory;don't leave seniors out of special events;Special transportation needs to be offered to seniors or people with disabilities to city council meetings or any meetings within the city they desire;more places for seniors to go and enjoy;Grandfather clause to help senior retirees?;There should be more places for senior citizens. ;Senior Programs with easy access;Need more parking options; Expand the parking of the Durham Life Senior Center or only paid parking; People don't want to drive to the Senior Life center; education around fare waiver programs - need to get the word out about fare reduction and waiver programs;Don't overlook poor and old people!;What's in place to help out the elderly? We are all old except one. ;More consideration and services for the senior citizens of Durham;Housing for elders - more people are aging, call center number for assistance and support;Senior citizens - lot of property on sale, lot of housing going up, but what's affordable for senior citizens? No elbow room, pushed into groups, crime going up.;Senior Citizens: educating them on resources, help not be displaced by gentrification. ("Resources" meaning who to call when you need help, if your family doesn't live nearby?;3. Seniors;more senior services - currently not enough available for older folks;more resources for senior citizens;Elderly people are showing up at the hospital because they cannot live alone and have no resources;qualifications to get help;folks are trying let's help them;social services: children, single parents, low-wealth, elderly, at risk, recreation (parks, pubs, clubs);more shelters and help for the homeless;more help and support for drug addicts who want to be helped.;Drug programs and housing for long-term.  Healthcare for Adults that have low income "Basic", Job programs that pay as you train, Jobs that train, Housing for Adults on Drugs with Mental Issues, Build another grocery store in the Village area, more parks with adult workout equipment, more affordable programs for kids afterschool and activities, Food places in the Wellons Village area. More sidewalks, Fix potholes, homeless shelters, security, lighting, neighbor police patrol more, crime cut down and everything else falls into place.;Faster response rate from Human Services ;Programs;More for the homeless population;More legal counsel protection for Hispanics and immigrants;More outreach for those in trouble, the homeless, those in poverty, those in abusive environments.;Survivor support groups;ability to keep assistance if you work;assist people getting identification;The DSS Building ;Resources with social services.;I like the DSS building ;Resources - like social services;Need more employees at DSS to process things faster. ;More programs to assist low-income families with disabilities.;Want Durham to preserve the trees!;Stop the flooding in our neighborhood.;Would like Durham to be focused on environmental sustainability –came from CA reducing single use plastics, a lot of consideration about that in Durhams’ future to find alternative ways of doing things so the impact on the environment isn’t so great, solar power, likes green stuff, renewable energy ;Environment: landslides in neighborhoods;Increase natural sites: add environmental regulations to balance out all of the new construction going on and protect environment. ;more protective environmental laws;Plant trees equal to the trees bulldozed;incentivize recycling;investment in alternative, renewable energy, divest from fossil fuels;High taxes in black communities;How will blacks benefit from Durham's high taxes;Tax free country;Tax dollars spent in the community where taxes are paid;Property tax went up $113 this year, can't afford that. Don't want to sign a new lease on rent because it went up by $200;biggest concern on city and county taxes - getting higher an higher;The property taxes have gone up for everyone ;High taxes. Why pay taxes on cars.;City Council - consider how they tax Duke. Duke doesn't pay taxes. Duke is a non profit organization. Citizens pay taxes and Duke doesn't.;Lower property taxes! They've almost doubled since before the big boom.;Taxes have increased even doubled for people who have lived here before the big boom. What can be done for those who are struggling to stay in their homes. ;Lower property taxes and stop putting high taxes on black communities, we know it is your way of pushing us out of our homes;increased taxes;reasonable taxes;property tax caps for long term homeowners to combat gentrification;Durham pays some of the highest taxes;Stop tax increases on people that's trying to live in their houses and not purchasing to sell;Who do you contact that would make a difference in taxing?;Lower taxes;mass transit system needed!;Durham needs better transit;Better transportation in the future;Transportation changes;City Transit need(should) meet the needs of the consumers;City of Durham get behind local nonprofits with addressing the issue of transportation. Specifically participants that go through DSS central intake.;Durham has come a very long way but it could be better with transportation access.;funds for daycare transportation, inner city grants for small businesses.;Transportation;Need for normal public transportation. Make it easier for folks to get to Atlanta and NY.;Public Transportation - more routes, more options for types of vehicles, alternate routes for small buses, vans. More: greenspaces and good lighting in downtown, green connections (trails)through downtown, communication in and about Durham, scattered affordable housing and more sidewalks.;Improvement by transportation so people can get to jobs. ;Non-driving citizens;Transportation;Easy access to transportation;Transportation;A better Transit system, events to educate and show history of Durham;How are stops (location) chosen?;lack of interconnectivity. ;Transportation is main thing ;Transit system not good so location needs to be close to things they need to access; transportation at the root of all these things,  ;Access to city hall drug stores grocery stores restaurants etc. ;Really clear to all of us transportation is such a huge obstacle that is should be obvious ;Many of the folks who are moving to Durham are older and vision loss is common as folks age and they will have transportation needs – necessary for productive healthy place for people to live ;When you do call to report a problem, they listen and then “ok bye” it’s over and nothing seems to get any better ;Have been working for about 2 years on trying to get improvements in the paratransit, there’s a lot of disappointment in the lack of progress, advocating for an on-demand system like uber and lyft that would save the city money; at this point there is a lot of frustration about not seeing a lot of process, paratransit is low on the list when transit is considered, it’s critical in getting to work and volunteers and museums and doctors appointments and ; how high you are on the list on what needs to be addressed it impacts how much you’re listened to; handicapped friendly versus handicapped accessible, everyone can go through a checklist but the consideration of those issues need to be put way up on top as priority number 1;Recommends ATL [servicing all areas] train system. Bring that to Durham (and New York Express);Regulate electric scooters - add lanes for them in the street - make easier for cars to avoid;An ideal Durham would be more inclusive for those who don't have adequate transportation. ;transportation;lack of transportation and transit access contributes to segregation;Free transportation;more bike lanes;An ideal Durham for me would be having more space for people who ride bikes and make transportation access better for those that need to get to a doctor's appointment.;city stipends to purchase bicycles;more bike lanes;More skateboard and bicycle control since they are often found in the middle of the street;Negatives about Durham: Public transportation isn't that good.;Improved public transportation and fewer cars;Bus system;GoTriangle, City and GoDurham are not working together.;Convenient transportation.;Free buses.;I don't like the way bus stops, traffic signs are. Traffic signs need to be more visible from far away. It is difficult to see if the stops are not close enough.;Bus drivers don't know city streets well enough. People in the back of the bus know better.;Some neighborhoods, you have to stand out in the heat, rain, cold outside of bus stops.;Service all people and parts of Durham (Bus, more sidewalks, no bike lanes, free bus service for all);Keep the bus transit going with proper sidewalks to get to transit area. Some people don't have cars need for getting to work, doctors' appointments and to get to grocery stores;implementing a better transit system affordable, flexible hours that relate to working hours;free bus fare;public transportation and  shelters all though Durham and free fare for all;shorter wait time for Durham access riders. More buses more routes (access);Accessible curbs at bus stops (All);accessible curbs at all bus stops;Bus stops to have shelters (All);Bus line for the outer loop for a shorter commute. Ex: The bull city connect;Moving here from another state is difficult because I rely on public transportation to get to and from work, sometimes I am late for the school bus it takes me up to 1-2 hours to get to school on the city bus.; Bad Public Transportation. ;access to routes online. Bus terminal is dangerous and a hang out spot.;Chapel Hill transportation is free. Can we have that?;Would rather take public transportation. Can't because of access. Not comfortable. Build pavilions, Signage isn't good Traffic throughout Durham. All the new people throughout Durham;more steps for Public Transportation have benches and covers for bus stops;who designs the bus routes? could they use this route to get to their own jobs for 5 days?;subway, bus every 10 or 15 minutes, free bus in some areas;Removal of the free bus service really hurt lot of people more than you think;About this transit change: To upend bus times and schedules in the depths of winter is to expose poor people to hypothermia.;About this transit change: it feels thoughtless and cruel-- a plan conceived by a city employee who drives a fleet vehicle every DAY. This change has been undertaken like building a boat from flotsam in the middle of a lake. How many people have you stranded? How many people were late for work, daycare, meeting the kids at home? ;About this transit change: If a route changes at a certain hour, please, make it CLEAR before the route begins! ;About the transit change: The bus stop at the end of Riddle Road is disgraceful. *No where* to sit, only feet from road construction, families with children are forced to stand in construction debris or the ROADBED. ;About the transit change: What is WRONG with routing a bus directly past the grocery store?;About the transit change: The TransLoc app will get you LEFT-- with two minutes to spare. ;What looks like a short distance on a map is often a quarter mile to walk from a bus stop. There are NO sidewalks along much of Durham's roadway. If you use a walker or wheelchair-- Forget it. ;Every bus stop should have a shelter over them;Sheltered bus stops;Change the appearance of bus stops;Bus stations and stops and better bus times;Better Roads, broader transportation, and advertisements. Create better bus stop stations;Go to the hub. Buses themselves are;BCC is being cut;More frequent bus routes. Only every 30 minutes, sometimes 45 minutes. 15 minute would be great.;Over 65, or disabled get free or reduced fare. That's great. Need more subsidy. ;Why do some Durham ACCESS people have to pay and some don't Doesn't seem fair. ;If the rail comes will buses still be in the city to ride?;Transportation system is dated;More bus stops - Danube Ln residents no close bus stop;Covered bus stops;Subsidize transportation, bus lines and areas of travel must be extensive and based on needs of population;Non-drivers - can afford drivers, shuttle buses, transportation;Transportation in all senior citizen complexes and areas that are more than one hour. Create a senior bus to come into areas to pick up and drop off. Change age from 65+ to 62.;Bring back free buses;more bus stops;Bus shelters at every stop.;Bluefield area needs more speed bumps and lighting and bus covers.;Better Bus stops and more in the black community so its easy to get to work. We have to walk a long way to the bus stop in some areas  ;Orange County – transportation specialist – kind of a cool position – creates volunteer driver program, bus buddies to ride with folks that helps vision impaired folks with good mobility and orientation, sometimes just need a friend to ride it with them a few times ;All have horror stories around transportation; Had to be ready at 7am to be at 10am meeting. Picked up at 7:30 got here at 8:30 for a 10am; not always like this; so much wait time to early or waiting to be picked up to get home, sometimes 7 or 8 hours to travel for an hour meeting; limits ability to want to go to a meeting; social isolation which can spiral into depression, we have a lot to contribute but if its not available to us we can’t make those contributions; we need Uber in this town,  ;Have Access as a city service as opposed to a contract – that firm has no idea what’s going on in the city or how the routes should go, bus system is accountable to the people so should paratransit be accountable to us,  ;Buses let you off right there in the ditch ;GoDurham Access contracted out, hierarchical boondoggle so many different departments and levels, streamlining that so if we talk to one person about a scheduling issue it actually matters, that folks have a say so into the schedule changes no matter their title ;have noticed that in the vans the drivers are no longer playing music, music was loud and noisy and you couldn’t hear what was going on, it wasn’t safe ;Scheduling issues and wait times I don’t think anyone has seen any improvement ;Automated system where you get a call when you have a ride scheduled – just stopped working, may need to be replaced, why didn’t you just let us know? ;Accessible is almost a defeatist attitude; one of the things that came out of our forum, they said it shouldn’t be easier for us to be able to get transportation, the people who are riding the bus are on the bus for an hour and a half too. But we think it shouldn’t be harder; would the average person be willing to have everything they need in life in Greensboro, because that’s the best analogy;  ;They have to call two weeks out but not before, what if I have an emergency, they should be able to accommodate those situations, better quality riding buses some of the streets are really bad, sometimes I go home with a headache from being on the bus for 3 hours ;Hire more staff more buses,  ;Bus routing issue. Why do I have to go back downtown to move routes.;Incorporate Express routes to get places quicker. 10min routes. Don't make us go downtown to get around.;Like GoTriangle. That makes sense.;More bus stops. Trottle Ridge in neighborhoods. Walks 2 miles to bus stops.;Bus takes too long. Extend buses to more places in Durham (Hebron area) Summer meadows.;Transfer buses. Don't make to go all the way to the bus station to get from bus A to B. Add transfer buses. ;Shelters for people who ride the bus. ;Care more about bike trail than bus route.;Trash cans and benches.;Make friendly to ride;Why are they tearing down bus shelters? off of MLK;Shelter everywhere there's a bus stop.;Better transportation - make bus system more accessible to certain areas - update texting schedule system;Improve bus routes;I would also like better transportation where buses run more frequently and maybe a light rail. ;Public transportation needs to be better! When I went to college, the bus by my house came once an hour. If I missed it, I missed my class. Also it cuts off after 10pm-- what about the people who work at night? In Sydney, Australia, public transportation is great - virtually always on time, clean, light rail, subway, goes everywhere (even the middle of nowhere).;Also public transportation won't take you past city limits. ;My friend had to walk a mile after getting off the bus to get to her house.;The bus even actually *passed* her neighborhood but it's not allowed to stop unless it's a bus stop. But sometimes the bus drivers would stop for her because they see her walking.;We need crosswalks that actually go to where bus stops go. ;Transportation- if you don't have enough funds, how do you get to a job or interview? We need buses to come often enough that people can rely on it. ;Easy access to resources (bus line);More bus stops; trash cans at all bus stops; benches and shelters at more bus stops; route and general info at all bus stops; more frequent bus schedule;accessible healthcare related transportation;incentivize using public transportation;fare-free public transit;more bus hubs;better public transportation to reduce traffic;community bus service with good schedules for bus routes;more efficient buses;green buses;free bus rides for disabled;access to public transportation;more concentrated bus stops;accessible and desirable public transportation;I would use public transportation instead of driving if it was more convenient and efficient;Transit is terrible, bus system should be free; ;Businesses may not pick Durham to put their companies because of lack of public transit;Bus stops in poorer neighborhoods are not maintained;If Chapel Hill and Carrboro can figure out free bus systems why can't Durham?;I have to walk 2-3 miles to get to a bus stop;Bad: Bus comes here;Better public transportation;Buses not the same. more bus stops. 24-hr buses. ;24-hr bus transportation. ;They cancelled the free bus?;Better public transportation options: more bus terminals, go to Raleigh and Chapel Hill, better advertisements on routes;More bus stops, carpools;Public transportation needs to get better. Only 1 bus terminal. Not build 1 or 2?;Take too long to get anywhere bus early and late and too full. They're building all these buildings but we can't get there. ;Buses don't go in certain areas and have to walk to get to somewhere. ;It's not 24 hours. I don't get off walk until 2:30 a.m.;Bus stops would be clean and they would have a roof in case it rains.;Stops would have something tactile so that the blind can touch it and know it is a bus stop.;Route changes would be announced;In these situations, consultation with bus operators is expected in order not to affect pedestrians.;Skateboards on the road at 3 am - Late bus must weave its way down the roadway to avoid skateboards;Buses take a long time to come by.;Take away having to go downtown Durham, free parking;Dollar van with direct start and stop on routine and the pricing is $1. New York Utilizes this model.;Parking not as accessible - 3 tickets;Uber ride pass?;Less vehicles.;Uber - car come to house, subsidize for seniors;wider roads - then  less congestion: commutes more convenient;Convenient (especially in downtown) and more locally sourced products. Way less traffic on highways.;Bluefield needs more speed bumps due to speeding.;Uber – not good places to meet and catch Ubers, work at DSS downtown and there’s people who park in the loading zone and the security officers says there’s nothing he can do, no curb where someone can pull over and pick someone up quickly, DPAC also dealing with this issue, this is really important for folks who have transportation issues, they should have uber loading zones ;Used to have (Dtran) monitors that ride the vans and report back problems that folks were having; no monitors now; they were volunteer; that would be nice that would be accountability ;Yellow flashing traffic lights are confusing to people, especially foreigners.;Traffic - Don't work on all of the streets at one time.;Better road conditions. Currently it's unsafe because of so many potholes and it costs people more to repair cars (e.g. tire replacement more often.) It's important to fix it sooner rather than later. ;Parking: even on NCCU's campus, they're towing students on game day. But these students don't have money.;Parking: students are the ones who live there, why do they have to leave?;There are a few concerns I have with the way Durham looks, but most critical is the road conditions. The highways and roadways of Durham are treacherous, and cause my personal costs to increase in terms of car maintenance. My tires have to be replaced more often and damaged roadways are unsafe. ;Parking;Parking is difficult and expensive;Carpool accessibility. ;People giving parking tickets be rude and plotting on you for money.;What happened to the funding for the light rail?;Will the light rail idea be reconsidered?;What happened to the train system plan? Is it still going to happen?;Mass transportation: train system established for research triangle area, bike paths are not working ;Subway, light rail, transfers and ride pass;affordable:  proximity, mobility, public transit, light rail;Perhaps a rail system that could better link Durham to the surrounding towns--not the train we have now, but more like the mass transit systems of San Francisco (BART) or Chicago.;Need money for the light rail;a light rail system with parking at pick up points;Rail will be built? When?;How long before light rail? Tentative date;No light rail- waste of funds;I have no input on the rails but I would say no if I had to say yes or no.;I would like to see a new transit and rail system but not if it impacts housing communities ;I think a transit city transition would be a great improvement. The light rail system will make things better but I don't want hard working people to lose their homes because of this venture. ;Bring the light rail. They tell us they're going to do something and take the money.;Add light rail. Collaborate with Raleigh and Greensboro. Charlotte to travel through both.;Transportation - Alternatives to that Light Rail;Transportation: Better train transportation to Raleigh, Charlotte, and Durham.;Train;Have a train like the bus schedule. ;Train to Durham to Raleigh to Greensboro on a regular basis, faster, like Atlanta ;A transit system could allow for people living outside of town (where housing is cheaper) to still be able to get into and back out of the city easily and ease the amount of road traffic. ;More transportation that will assist more folks with funding by other institutions;Convenient public transportation;Update transportation options including train, expanding bus routes, bus times and areas;Public transportation with broader districts and long hours;More transit and greenspace in all parts of Southern Durham not just the high rent areas. Downtown and East Durham too. ;Transit;cable cars since light rail project failed;This doesn't happen in other neighborhoods.;Inclusive: There's a big gap between haves and have nots. ;There are (2) Durhams. One for people with money and resources and one for people without and the gap between the two is widening. ;High rise, high priced condos keep going up downtown Compare that to the homeless people living under overpasses in downtown and to what is happening in McDougald Terrace is the perfect illustration of Durham's priorities;A safe place for all residents not determined by your location or address. A place that accommodates walkers throughout the city through sidewalks.; more sidewalks and user-friendly for people to use the bus route. Access needs to be expanded. More Weekly updates;Sidewalks: new on Garrett Road and maintenance otherwise to enhance walkability;Clean up the streets to make it better to walk the streets and sit on your front porch again.;Make me feel welcome and I could walk the streets;better sidewalks for the handicap;Sidewalks one of my chief concerns, hard to be active when most of the streets don’t have sidewalks or they start and stop, the sidewalks are not in good shape difficult to walk with a mobility cane; not knowing which streets below to the city vs. the state ;Need to have the City maintain but it’s maintained by the state ;Pay attention to major intersections to have the technology to have safe passage from one side to the other, beeping for crossing (like near hospital) ;City of Durham is very accommodating of blind people at intersections; traffic commission has been receptive if you have a place you need an audible signal unless it’s a state road ;City takes care of these things within a few weeks the state is months ;Audible signals are fine to let us cross, but when a car driver doesn’t give up right of way to pedestrian there is no penalty, if they know their license can be taken then they’ll be more careful about people crossing streets, need a consequence to keep people from doing this; some people don’t know what a white cane means ;Use tv advertisements about driving safety by the city, drivers ed doesn’t teach what it means to have a white cane, put information at the DMV to convey this information ;In Durham sidewalks are getting better, until the mid 80s there was no ordinance for sidewalks, but now if you put up a building or subdivision you have to put in sidewalks ;Need a referendum on sidewalks, because you always hear it costs a lot to do these things, but just like street paving ;Making sure things are installed properly, go to the trouble to put the ramps with the domes, puts people diagonally out into the middle of the intersection where they are perpendicular to one another and there are two of them ;There are several areas in Durham that are a hazard especially to blind people, sidewalks that stop abruptly sidewalk will terminate and then start again in 10 feet, Highway 98, Highway 55, university drive by maple wood cemetery, sidewalk ends after the opening to the cemetery,  ;This is an issue (City wide) where just 5-10 feet is missing,  ;Sidewalks leaving the shelters that continue. ;Put more money into streets and sidewalks, less into bike lanes. More people walk than bike.;accessible walking and biking trails;more pedestrian bridges designed by citizens;improve walkability;My neighborhood has sidewalks to nowhere and then we have to walk in the street;I have to cross a busy intersection to check my mail;Garbage collectors also hinder pedestrian traffic.;That street is called Junction Rd., but there are lots of pedestrians and cyclists.;Pedestrian crossings lights have been installed to warn about pedestrians.;Pedestrian crossing in areas such as Junction Rd. Speed reduction signage is outdated.;There are no sidewalks, no infrastructure for cars and pedestrians. The city has grown more than expected.;All that rain comes downhill.;Improve the water treatment areas. lots of pollution- Fayette place;Positives about Durham: Habitat for Humanity (provide me with career options after school and let's me make a difference in community ;What are your plans for expanding job opportunities for minorities?;Negatives: low minimum wage;Bring Job Corps to Durham.;Better jobs that let me be able to feed my kids next week.;living wage;more jobs;better wages 15 to 25 dollars a hour;better certified contractors and maintenance workers that are qualified to do the work need to be hired;adequate wages;Technology approach to aid in workforce development. Ex: new library and computer limits.;living wage and decent pay;more job creation (all kinds of work for different skills and abilities);$15 wage;More jobs;Not enough high paying jobs for decent quality of life.;Education Job Opportunity with City and County Government Leadership;Jobs and Affordable Housing;More jobs for graduates;News and media. more opportunities being brought to undergrads within work force.;entrepreneurial ecosystem-I was able to start a business after being a convicted felon;jobs geared for college students;CETA-like programs need to come back;resources in school to help students get jobs;more jobs;Jobs where minimum wage starts with 14-15.00 a hour;More opportunities for those that are trying;Better wages to afford housing being built;More jobs for people that need them (felons also);More jobs ;needs a living wage;Shouldn't take THREE jobs to survive;ONE job is *NOT* enough. Says he will work as many jobs as it TAKE to dwell in Durham. ;What means are being employed to identify potential entrepreneurs among single moms, the underemployed, the unbanked;Jobs - Labor Jobs - Training for Adults;Jobs across the board;Where more of our residents from here are employed and not just those who live in Cary, Raleigh, and Chapel Hill.; I think we can do better job training and partnering with Tech schools and trades. There is a real need for folks with welding and other skills that we can teach but not enough attention in high school on that.;More opportunities for employment for those with previous convictions (former inmates);Minimum wage is not a living wage. Social security is not enough to live on.;Job training to help citizens learn new skills, amp up existing skills, and also to teach citizens the fundamentals of job training, searching, and obtaining employment.;Better jobs | competitive ;Will change bring jobs for Durham?;More jobs;Better pay;Jobs with benefits;more resources for job training;Benefits;Pay;Better benefits and better jobs;More jobs and afford living;A place where unemployment is low;Help young people. Everybody wants to get a degree. (skills - plumbers, etc.) they need a certificate. Home economics, cookers classes;Job training - not just for the educated, those incarcerated and free, will need or end up back in prison;Job training especially for incarcerated persons including life skills, reinstate vocational education;City Jobs for high Risk Families and OR Children.;More programs to help get jobs;Programs for all felons to get Jobs and homeownership;Educational training for local residents for better employment.;Well paying jobs for everyone.;An ideal vision for Durham is one where we have a higher minimum wage at $15 an hour. ;Higher minimum wage;Provide training for current vacancies. The jobs I used to have required wearing 3 hats, and now they require 6 hats, but pay didn't go up with it proportionately and accordingly.;2 years ago I interviewed for a position at Red hat. It paid $45/hr. Now that same job pays $23 per hour - same job.;Do smaller programs tailored to what people in these kinds of neighborhoods need (underprivileged) (there used to be programs that trained people how to be an administrative assistant, welding, etc. It doesn't seem like those things are there anymore.) Needs to be more nurturing and handhold people a little.;City government needs to do more training for open positions. There aren't many jobs that don't require college degrees or skills like HTML.;More apprenticeships available for people in low income. Neighborhoods - then  Bring services to them, not just in the unemployment office. ;Training for current vacancies;Training for interviewing skills;inequalities around Pay: black women gets 65 cents on the dollar compared to white men;White women get 72 cents on the dollar;Job - Employment - Fair wage working wage. ;Better wages so people can stay in their homes and care for their families.;Better wages for people to live in Durham;Industry (jobs);not enough high paying jobs for decent quality of life;job opportunity;livable wages;job training;raise minimum wage;More jobs for ex felons;employment opportunities for all and everyone who wants to work;livable wages;increase tech access and make sure black kids know about careers in health care and tech;more job training programs for teens;job placement for disabled;It is hard to find employment in Durham, particularly if you don't fit into a certain mold even if you are capable of doing the job.;Dislike: Need more resources for employment training for adults - "Grants or affordable loans";Better paying jobs, reasonable housing wages, expanded public transportation, easier access to resources, improvement in DSS. ;Pay Rate go up;Easy to get a job. ;More jobs that pay more starting at $10.00 or more;Wage increases;Easy to get a job here vs. further down south;Job fairs and College Fairs;A lot of work building houses;Negatives about Durham: It's harder for younger people to find jobs.;Positives about Durham: Blackspace/ig: @thespaceblack;How to improve the negatives: Need to be more job opportunities for those under the age of 20.;How to improve the negatives: Have classes set up in school to teach workplace etiquette. Have a job fair at school.;More stuff for teens. Move up to date basketball courts and sponsorships to have the opportunities to expand horizons (DPAC plays, engage swaps);Employee more young adults for afterschool programs.;Ways to improve negatives: get youth more involved in community;Curfew for underage group;more city jobs for the youth and young adults;Why aren't young generation involved in activities or any outdoor events?;More spaces for young people to go;How can we help educate children about drugs, so that they will not want to take or sell drugs;how to get our "kids" off drugs and stop selling drugs?;More youth activities within the neighborhoods and accessible to kids. What happened to the boys and girls club?;Living arrangements. The guns that's are out too much. not enough fun activities for young children, Hospitals and school can open for camps during the summer. The fire hydrant could be open so children could use to get wet in.; more outlets for children, ;Leaders and Athletes working to better communities. Come visit kids and take children in low income neighborhoods to business, professional games, trips, etc. Just show them more than what they see everyday. Be a better influence.;more jobs for youth;child-friendly parks;create opportunities for kids and youth (college age) to be paid for the work they do to support sibs and parents;Programs for youth;More involvement with disadvantaged youth - kids who are out here trying to DO SOMETHING in spite of the struggles at home;Activities for youth;Deterrent to negative influences;Show disadvantaged kids what *Durham* has to offer. ;Send kids to DPAC! ;Show them life @ Duke, Central;Former gang member he says kids need ALTERNATIVES to "That life";A place where schoolkids attend DPAC shows regularly;A focused alternative to gang life in Durham;How can we bring DPAC to school children and young adults?;Kids should be able to work at 14 instead of running the streets every day;There should be more activities year round;More active parks and basketball courts and playgrounds for the youth;More jobs for youth, more education and training programs for youth;A community center for youth when they get out of school. Youth don't have anything to do leads to gangs, getting in trouble.;Kids playing in parks;Youth activities;Need more youth programs;Resources needed for the youth aside from football, basketball. ;Operation breakthrough - a way to bring children together;Is there a centralized way to disperse information related to the youth?;Programs to encourage kids to feel needed.;Spoke to area of Cornwallis business about comp plan - 1st concern is youth. walking around carrying guns - see street kids keeping youth find direction;Support system - kids have somewhere to go that's safe - strive for the great things; everything doesn't have to be negative, have a skill set, see something they can be, experience world for greatness - not just negativity, some people didn't have a chance. Let person be individual, not someone someone else wants them to be - kids have skills, to utilize skills in city, county,;drugs, crime, anger, grew up in a city that doesn't love them back, have scholarship, be safe - youth training, job assistance, affordable housing, property value goes up, higher taxes - I plan to stay here;Policy change is important. 16 year old able to vote because youth want to be involved. ;Not enough opportunities for youth to stay out of trouble.;More fun and learning workshops for youth.;There is no where for our children to play. Put more playgrounds back into the community that are easy to get to. ;More youth programs at our community center.;More play areas for youth (Frankie's, Dave and Busters, skyzone, wetpark) and more community events for youth and adults.  ;I worry about how our youth may be misguided. ;Access to things for young people to do that is constructive and safe;Rec centers and boys and girls clubs  ;Not a lot of places for young people to hang  ;Not a lot of things for young people to do ;Better resources for Black males to bring them up starting young keep them out of trouble (homeless and crime with  black males;More outreach programs in high violence areas. Taking kids out of neighborhoods.;Professional team coming to take kids to places and give clothes and shoes. ;Lack of programs is getting black boy into trouble. Give them activities to keep them busy.;The behavioral problems with our youth: we need to look at how they start, and do workshops and seminars (e.g. empowerment). Get more parental involvement (andhelp them do better better parenting skills).;2. Youth;Millennials sometimes need help managing their emotions, knowing when to pick their battles.;youth don't have the same respect for their elders, holding doors, helping them get what they need, etc.;Better programs for black communities; before and after school;summer camps teens (12-17) more fill quickly;More activities for more children of all ages.;Recreation Park for kids after school.;Need more Recreation Centers for the kids to go to;Programs for youth and boys;Better childcare - not run down home daycares;reformed zoning laws to broaden housing options;Business stay together, homes together - do not build business within homes and houses;Negatives: social media;Ways to improve negatives: get along with everybody;Equal;treating people the same as when they lived in the projects;Live without fear;How to get the attention of minorities;Rent increase;Very Home Environment on break on uprising continually progressing;Free of ridiculous amounts of trash and attempting to improve of the visual state of some of these houses and rent and properties that continuously plague our beautiful city!;That we recognize the value in others and help cultivate the greatness within;Space for local good talent;"Unrealized Capital Gains" are a slap in the FACE to EVERY tax-paying Durhamite. Do you have some unpaid stock positions in the couch cushions? I do not. Little better than "monopoly money," these "opportunity Funds" are *welfare* for stockholders.;I don't like Durham at all!;Just tear the whole city down honestly it's too toxic.;A place where the disadvantaged actually GET what they are promised by city officials. ;Banking;More resources in lower income areas and comm. life skills instead of leaving to find constructive things, Arts and Crafts;Deferred maintenance. Stoves are from the 60s. ;Durham is a beautiful place to live.;Home;Fair judicial system. Police and communities working together. Not killing our black men.;Instead of city planning how to build Durham, focus on ensuring businesses are legit.;My hope is growth will help out the homeless. What are some things - can we suggestions on that?;More pathways to stability;Up to date;Advancement (move up);When will this written plan be approved and put into action?;Did the last plan (2005) go according to plan?;How are bus stops chosen? Location;Is there a centralized way to disperse information related to youth?;Innovative in solutions for collective challenges;No stability;Opportunity;Ownership;Single parents;Drones with cameras to come through neighborhoods;Need electric wheel chairs;New ideas for affordable housing. ;Roads and sidewalks needed all over the Braggtown area. Unsafe bus stops when standing on side of road. Roxboro Road and East Club need to be worked on ASAP Dearborn Old Oxford and East Club need sidewalks.;New Club Blvd Community Center;That starts what is needed most.;My ideal Durham is for everyone to be in a safe environment. I also see a low unemployment rate and for lower income families to live in more fixed up places;intervention programs;abandoned building repurposed;Door to door postal service for people on busy streets or put mailbox on side of street where people live;Durham is behind the times in knowing what people need;City needs to pick up the litter and mow the grass on the roads, streets;What do you like most about living in Durham: Nothing;Southpoint;No car vices in stops. They would be safe.;A: Sometimes, unneeded systems are implemented.;Money obtained there: they didn't like it elsewhere.;They spent it there.;Note: there is an image of three stick figures holding hands in an upward position and smiling;WE ARE ONE, WEAK ALONE;Stand for something;More family oriented ;SAVE The EP;Help us All!;Transparency--Be transparent about decision process for giving public money to private corporations; let residents know what information and data is shared with private companies (e.g. Amazon) in the hope of luring their business.;Involvement in the politic and civic process should be much more accessible so more jobs in communications and social media. Like I should have been seeing updates and reminders about the public comprehensive plan gatherings in my social media. I would like as many meetings and hearings and whatnot to be livestreamed and available On Demand.;5. SIDE WALKS and ACCESSIBILITY There are a lot of places where there is no sidewalk or the side walk is broken. Places where the doors are not able to be opened by people with a range of accessibility needs from a parent carrying a child along with a bag to someone in a wheelchair. More attention needs to be paid to this existing federal standard.;An affordable and accessible place to live, work and play, where corporations don't determine what's good or isn't good for our city. ;I make an average amount of money, after taxes, I couldn't live by myself in Durham. Rents are increasing everywhere and wages are not. There are too many buildings going up with condos and apartments for rent or to buy that barely anyone in the middle class can afford. With all the problems surrounding DHA, we also need to focus on making lower income homes safe and affordable. A lot of the people that live in a DHA home, are disabled, are single mothers with multiple children, and a lot of them end up getting evicted because there are too many stipulations where they can't work enough to keep up. Housing in Durham needs to be more focused on people who make less than $50,000 a year than building mid and high rises every time a developer wants to build. The city council has the power to say that we need affordable housing, but yet they won't. ;I worry about affordability and safety. Rent is too high and the homes being sold are pricing the middle class out of the market. ;My biggest concern is all the new, hipster, overpriced apartments and restaurants going in downtown. I was walking down Foster street and felt like I didn't know where I was. Change marches on, but I'm concerned about the rising rent and inaccessibility that these changes are bringing. I know I benefit directly from gentrification, but I'm really concerned about it.; Affordable food. An equitable place with diversity in race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, gender identification.;Concern for affordable housing and wages;  I volunteer at UMD and the rate of homelessness plus evictions as gentrification outruns our most vulnerable citizens alarms me.;My ideal Durham looks like a safe community, known for its  happening art scene and a social scene that draws people from all walks of life together. ; more opportunities for community art, more public park improvements, ;Art, Culture, Green space,;Arts and housing accessible to all socio-economic groups. ; artistic, safe;8. COMMUNITY ARTS AWARDS Funds and other resources that the community gets to decide who is awarded.;Vibrant arts, great restaurants. ;A diverse community where everyone feels welcome and valued. Lots of trees and natural areas. ;A city that embraces all people who wish the best for their fellow Durhamites, promotes business growth, arts related events, ;Fully inclusive.  Loads of entry level opportunity - an easy place to start a business, from genome editing to lawn mowing.  Expanse of opportunities for small, under-capitalized young people to enter.; focus on local businesses;Regulations are overly complicated and due to their complexity, favor large developers over individual citizens. The city's rules should be re-written to not be elitist so that mom and pop shops and startups can start small and grow strong. Make the rules more equitable to foster local business.;Let's not forget a growing Tourist trade where Hotels will be needed.  Density would be high in the center. City services, should be a integrated into the town center and not sitting side by side by side.  When the city isn't working, this makes for LONG stretches of darkened buildings with no one around.  They need to be dispersed.  As we expand outward from this area, the neighborhoods beyond should have focused "centers".   So outside of downtown, each area should have a focused center for businesses and services.  As one goes farther out, the centers get farther apart so that a person living between might actually have 4 centers to choose from.  The farther we go, the more car-dependent it should be as some people want more distance between them and business and neighbors.  This would be different than "suburban sprawl" where corridors of car-dependent shops are used like arteries.  The area where Guglhupf and Rockwood Square is located feels very much like this.  That no one would ever actually walk there or walk between shops even despite that it is surrounded by housing and people living nearby. It lacks sidewalks, crosswalks, parking, or continuity.  If this were to be a central area, it needs to "feel" like a city center and provide the same focused attention.  Out 15/501, where the Target and Sam's are located, where parking lots are abundant, an streets are wide, this "center" seems appropriate for the types of destination shopping that is allowed there. However, it still lacks crossing walks, bike lanes, or other pedestrian and bike-friendly items that are needed for someone who lives close-by to simply stroll over to the Harris Teeter and get some groceries.  If we're going to focus and allow lots of  housing there, we need to make sure people can walk or bike or take public trans to important services.  There should also be green spaces, maybe as a part of the bike and walking lanes. Same goes with Woodcroft, South Point, Highway 55 Highway 54 area and centers near RTP.   The 9th Street area is a good example of walkable, bikeable, and pedestrian friendly, but it is starting to really sprawl along the Hillsborough Rd corridor.  In a perfect world to me, all those "businesses" in houses along Broad would be rezoned back to homes. Housing would be more disperse, not as dense as downtown, but nearer each center there would be a higher density option and multi-use buildings.  Expanding out from the center density would get less and as it hits another doily, the order reverses, getting more dense as the next doily gets to the center.;I think more emphasis needs to be focused on bringing small and large businesses to Durham. We want the GSK of the world to be here but we also need to attract small entrepreneurs and start ups. We need to see more diversity in our businesses too. ;Fair chance for economic and housing development inclusion for locals;A well-planned marriage of businesses, community and art centers, ;with places for new businesses and creative pursuits to thrive, with excellent education and opportunities for all;Incentives for business development is not necessary; we need to put people, community, and communal green spaces first, before we submit to every developers requests;Durham will never survive on locally-owned businesses alone.  While I know we love to love them, Durhamites are not actually spending the money on them to keep them alive and thrive.  It doesn't mean we need an Olive Garden downtown, but we do need to encourage and engage companies, making it easy for them to do business in Durham, to come here and provide a little sense of familiarity  to newcomers and tourists. There should be a Trader Joe's in Durham.  There should be a Starbucks downtown somewhere - probably in one of the office buildings that have retail space available and no tenants (like the Chesterfield building or that new building on Morris).  How about some recognizable retail shops like dry cleaners, UPS stores, nail salons, or even a florist.;More retail, commercial hubs north of I-85. Northgate Mall is half empty, the malls on North Roxboro Street are low-end with no variety.;A way to encourage people to shop local and support our retail shops and stay off amazon!;Finally, we need a real economic development strategy to attract and help grow the right kind of businesses that can in turn fund the continued smart growth of Durham.;Durham has lost it's love for community.  It's become very disconnected from the values and worth of the people who live or lived in the community.  Durham appears to be no place for children who are the future of Durham.  No place for seniors who stood in the gates for it's mere existence.  If you just look around where is the hope for though lower wealth community, the homeless and those that are put out of their community because they can no longer afford the taxes.  ;A city that encourages and rewards good citizenship and neighborliness. ;1. **Strengthen and expand social infrastructure.** Lots of research supports the idea that social connections are essential to the health of cities, neighborhoods, and individuals, and are particularly needed among underserved communities. How can we make libraries, parks, recreation centers, greenways, etc. more conducive to the intermingling of strangers and to people gradually developing meaningful relationships, especially among our most disadvantaged neighbors? How can we give more support to local programs that focus on strengthening relationships among those experiencing poverty and hardship (TROSA, East Durham Children's Initiative, Families Moving Forward, etc.) and invite in other such programs (Thread, RecycleForce, Hudson Link, Prison Fellowship, The Open Table, etc.)?;A friendly, compassionate, and responsible community with first-rate public education options;A city where neighbors of all backgrounds and races talk with and support each other. A city that has more green space downtown, and, citywide, more trees since we are losing our canopy to age and to development.  A city where the environment and nature and community building are top priorities.;This can not be done when capital and revenue are in the top priorities. Sustainability yes. But this range of offerings will not likely thrive if enterprises that prioritize profit over service and sustainability are given more access (for whatever reason) than community rooted and resonant approaches.;Crime rates.;If would be great if area in which you live could be crime free or that the crime rate could be down. Be great if there is a playground for the children to play.;Love Durham but hate the crime issues. ;More police officers and renovated public housing. ;We need more police officers and renovated public housing. The city and county have treated the poor unfairly for long enough. ;First, we need to deal with crime before it becomes an irreversible problem.  Having people shooting assault rifles at each other in the shadow of DPAC cannot be tolerated.  It doesn't have to take many bad violent crime incidents to stop people from coming to Durham to work, open new businesses and live.  It is shameful that the city council has positioned our police department as a toothless semi-enemy of the people.  And it is dangerous.;The growth of the Country is growing, while the police force and schools stay stagnant.    When will our elected officials open their eyes ?  ;Nothing, just safety. I love trees! I voted for the mayor and met him. I respect his environmentalism, I hear him talk about trees. However we need more police officers urgently. Planting more trees can wait.;Crime is soaring.  Get it under control.  Don't catch and release the violent criminals.  Do something about the gangs while you're at it. ;Eliminating gun violence ;Some worries about gun violence;Besides the concerns about violence, particularly gun violence, I love Durham! I think it has more character than its neighbors in the Triangle.;Lately there have been too many senseless shootings and other crimes.  They seem to be committed by people that are over 18, and out of school, but who have not developed a useful skill or purpose in life.  We need to create opportunities for these young people to develop work skills, and positive ties to the community.  Even if it is just so called make work CCC type of jobs, but not so much "Thule-bending", as jobs that develop an updated skill set to reflect modern society.  It will enhance Durham and build connections among residents.;We have to address the root causes of violence. More police is not the answer, we can't beat people into pro-social behavior, we need to eliminate the environmental factors that allow violence to fester. ; minimal crime, technology,;  Ideal Durham has low police presence. Ideal Durham takes steps to aid the growing homeless community. ;bad place to live because there is a lot of bad stuff happening here in Durham  a safer environment for kids would be nice.;There is a lot of shooting that are happening.;Durham to me is going out bad they have had a lot of murders happen.;Less violence. Legal weed.  Less guns. ;An equal Durham without violence ;A place where respect for others is held to a high standard, and where our role in the world-at-large is not ignored. So for example we do not seek police training from a foreign state that practices Apartheid. Good and safe housing, ; reduced crime, and available and affordable housing. ;It looks much like it does today but with less crime and more moderate elected officials. ;Homicides have been ticking up, and our schools are still largely self-segregated;We need to get illegal guns off the street. ;The crime rate is high. It was foolish not to hire more officers and that needs to be corrected. Also, I feel people are getting squeezed out of downtown by the high costs of commercial property. Maybe there should be some oversight. ; My ideal Durham holds their police force accountable and prioritizes equity training for officers. My ideal Durham also refrains from setting high bail rates for non-violent offenders. My ideal Durham also invests back into the city. ;Too much Violence.  Shootings, robberies and crime level is much too high;The increased number of shootings and deaths of young people here this year has been hard to live with and read about. We need to do something about it, and soon.;The police department may think they're progressive, but they are still behind in many areas. One example is (as I have heard) that the chief refuses to allow patrols to carry naxalone. This appears to be a blame-the-victim attitude. Durham should promote the view that everyone in the town, whether long-term resident or short-term visitor, is a human being deserving of respect and consideration.;Violence;Crime;The city needs to start enforcing laws already on the books - expired license plates, Historic overlay issues,  homeless sleeping on State Property, speeding, abandoned cars, unregistered beggars, trespassing, building violations, etc. You won't hire more cops, then hire more civil servants to cite people and potentially enforce things.  What good is Durham One Call if there is no follow up by the city?  And where is the infrastructure to support those who ARE in compliance and make them feel that their city and neighborhood is being cared for by those who have made the rules.  No one should have to call the city 6 or 7 times just to have an abandoned car towed.  We seem to have lots of time and money to give to police officers to direct traffic every day for schools and churches letting out. My money would be better spent on writing tickets for speeders.;The amount of gun violence is alarming.;2. TRANSFORMATIVE JUSTICE The police are not a good solution for anything. The model is broken. That's all there is to it. However, I want to have someone or some group to call when there is a need for a safety team, conflict, danger or an emergency. I think demilitarizing and RE-HUMANIZING peace and safety by centering peace and safety is the next priority. 9 times out of 10 we do not need people with guns who think it is a good idea to lock human beings in cages to be the ones we call when we need help or want to create peace and safety in our homes or communities. Other cities and communities have done it. We can do it and do it even better I bet.;I love the pride we have for our city. I worry some about the exponential growth and maintaining the culture and diversity that makes Durham so great.; filled with culture, walkable areas. ;I'm concerned about Durham looking like an "everywhere and nowhere" place. The new condos and apartments don't seem to have requirements to retain a sense of place or capture the essence of Durham. The new ones next to Brightleaf look particularly out of place.;We have the opportunity to treat all of our cultural practices like they are valuable. Not just the ones that meet old and/or European respectability standards. If we make space for one another then we don't have to be in conflict. Today I may want to drum with 30 other people but tomorrow I may want to host a silent meditation retreat. Let's make space for the beauty of our fullness. Affordable housing is a place to rest our heads, yes. But it is also space for us to live our lives out in the world solo and with one another.;It is painful, especially for a city as greedy as Durham, but we must stop allowing new re-zoning to high density housing or business until after infrastructure is in place to support it.  The massively delayed Durham connector is one such example.  Allowing new housing developments to be built along the 147 and Ellis corridor with that incomplete has made that part of the city utter gridlock.  Attempting to shoehorn in ill-conceived mass transit plans and strong arm private entities into supporting it is another big no.  ;Parking! where will all the people living in all the high rises park. I stay away from downtown more and more because it is so full of cars. What will this look like in 10 more years? At what point will we cap our downtown population so that downtown will still have space for everyone?; Areas along main transit arteries would be more densely developed, with lower density neighborhoods nearby.  The streets would be lined with trees.  ;My ideal Durham is one where we combat sprawl with infill development and a denser urban area. We fill it with developments and uses that serve the widest range of Durham residents, including public space, ;a small, high density, walkable, city with minimal national brands and a focus on local character.   ;Very dense core downtown area.  Preservation of existing historic neighborhoods. ;we have to embrace urban density and public and publicly accessible spaces; a Durham with livable density, plenty of green space and public centers;Small neighborhoods with small family houses and yards.  Maybe small parks in them.  I would like to preserve our large trees and open areas.  I do not agree with the "fill in all spaces" manifesto. My neighborhood has been ruined by the grand plan to mix it up.  Our open space was rezoned despite our petition and apartments built where family homes should have been.  ;Durham is currently at a crossroads. After decades of neglect, our city is finally receiving attention and investment from the outside. That investment threatens to change the makeup of our community, however, as it favors wealthy white residents and further marginalizes people of color.  Our city and county governments have limited abilities to shape policy to prevent displacement and gentrification due to state preemption, but we need to take every step within our power to ensure that Durham's existing residents are not pushed out.;friendly, diverse, beautiful;A diverse community where everyone has the opportunity to earn a living wage,;Vibrant, diverse community where all are given an opportunity to participate, but we hold leaders and community members accountable for making the most of what Durham has to offer.;A diverse city where everyone has access to safe and affordable housing,;population diverse in every way.;A diverse community where everyone can work and live together (diverse by race, class, gender identity, age, religion, etc.).  A community in which one can limit one's carbon footprint either via public transit or having all amenities close by or able to walk and bike.  Downtown should include parks, gardens (vegetable and ornamental).;When you look in public spaces, restaurants and businesses, the diversity of Durham is equally reflected back.;A diverse city with job opportunities for all skill, education, income and age levels. ;A diverse, inclusive, creative community with a thriving culture and economic, social and academic opportunities for everyone.; Neighborhoods would have a range of folks with different incomes and ethnic backgrounds.  The city would not sprawl, like Raleigh has, and there would be forests and farms not too far away.;Multicolorful, multi generational, multiincome.;A diverse city where people can find decent housing they can afford, ;Diverse populations enjoying local stores and services;Diverse, intellectual, ;Diverse, welcoming and inclusive community; walkable downtown with network of public transportation that allows you to easily get from home to other destinations; plentiful parking;;diverse, thriving for all, highly walkable and easy, convenient transit with safe sidewalks and streets throughout;A diverse (people) city with ample affordable housing ;welcoming, diverse, beautiful, clean, inspirational, fearless, connected, understandable, accessible, human-scaled, nature-centric, idealistic, communicative, spontaneous, fun and opportunity for all ages all people.;Durham would become a diverse and wonderful city to visit.  Many of the negative images such as lack of safety disappears.  ;A more diverse and safe place; a thriving downtown (with many fantastic restaurants and the farmer's market, as we have now).  Racial equity and lots of programs to facilitate and support it, including ample money for all the schools. ;A livable downtown with more green space and parks and a better assortment of businesses—grocery stores, small hardware and general stores where you can buy daily essentials, dry cleaners, etc. restaurants are nice for workers but you have to go pretty far to get necessities.;Recent building downtown has featured boring, plain, boxy architecture.  It would be nice to feature more interesting buildings.;My ideal Durham looks like Durham 7-8 years ago, before the excessively tall building downtown, before the influx of ugly, unaffordable apartment and condo structures.;Its livable. It's fun! ;Durham is just not a place where I would want to ; I would love to see just more of what made Durham unique before it became 'hip' to be here.;I love Durham and just think we can do better. ;economic and political decisions made directly by Durhamites as much as possible.;Led by the People's Alliance, Durham has become the town of the left wing righteous, no less judgmental and no more accountable than the worst of the laissez faire conservative leadership; A city that values the contributions of all residents and that offers opportunity for creativity, entrepreneurial business, ;A city w a city council and city officials that consider all the persons of Durham and not just those in the 80% AMI Index. I would like to see Durham implement more trade, Employment and teen programs. More homeless to home programs and programs to help start small businesses. ;I think Durham has been bought and sold to the highest bidder with the intent of changing the city from its history of a rising people to that of the wealthy. I would like more transparency when bonds and other projects are on the ballots and I also would like to know where the light rail money disappeared to. During investigations I’ve learned many disturbing facts about the city, city council and the amount of funds available to the public that’s being distributed to the majority of only one demographic. I would like stipulations and laws to omit the amount of construction as we are now surrounded by these hideous blocky designer homes and buildings in contrast to our warm, inviting and friendly areas we formerly were blessed with. I would like the house of Durham to be cleaned and start over with people who were born and raised here. ;My ideal Durham starts with strong leadership that hold themselves accountable for Durham and represent the needs of Durham rather than their own agendas. ;My ideal Durham is a city where the progressive rhetoric of elected officials is matched by equitable, sustainable outcomes. For the purposes of the Comprehensive Plan, my vision of an ideal Durham focuses principally on building a sustainable public transportation system that is accessible for all citizens of Durham (and our region more broadly) and which reduces the need for citizens to use private vehicles. With the regrettable failure of the DOLRT initiative, I hope the City and County will prioritize the development of a Bus Rapid Transit system that has stops along all major thoroughfares and easy connectivity to other regional transportation options. I do not think the current model of organizing transit on a hub-and-spoke system is sustainable, as it requires residents to drive to transit centers. We need to have a transit system where the majority of residents can easily walk to a bus stop and reach their destination with, at maximum, one or two transfers. This will also require land use decisions that take into account public transportation options, e.g. denying applications for large new developments in areas of our city and county where there are no accessible transportation routes (or, alternately, designing new transportation routes to accommodate new developments). The City Council and Board of County Commissioners has failed abjectly in this respect by repeatedly authorizing massive new developments in areas that are not within easy walking distance of transit options.  ;To reiterate, Durham is the most deeply disappointing place I have ever lived. There is so much potential, but our leaders are more concerned with placating wealthy, out-of-town developers than they are serving the needs of our community, particularly members of marginalized groups. As a result, there is a startling gap between the rhetoric of our leaders and the reality of life in our community; while the already affluent in Durham are prospering more and more, the less affluent are falling further behind, and city and county officials pay lip service to considerations of equity and sustainability but vote for policies that produce the opposite outcomes. ;  I am a relatively new resident of Durham, and I have never been so deeply disappointed by the gap between a city's reputation and the reality of the lived experience of its residents. Specifically, Durham (and its leaders) portrays itself as a progressive community, but the decisions of our City and County leaders consistently produce regressive outcomes, e.g. prioritizing the development of the downtown core over less affluent areas of our city, facilitating intensifying gentrification and the displacement of large numbers of poorer, predominantly minority residents, etc. The next Comprehensive Plan MUST identify specific steps to effectuate the progressive rhetoric of our leaders. ;The dominance of rich neighborhoods in public planning is too obvious.  Even with an explicit "commitment to equity" this appears to remain the reality.  If they win, Durham will become a 2nd Chapel Hill.  Because of the natural of participatory planning, that is the default setting.  In light of this inequitable, faction driven process, It takes extraordinary leadership to chart a different course.;progressive city that is accountable to its residents and not the financial interests of real estate developers. ;Provide down-payment or interest rate incentives to civil servants to move into particular neighborhoods, especially those neighborhoods needing more police presence. Make all Civil Servants, including teachers, live in the city of Durham.  Chicago does this. ; The members of the city planning department I have spoken to are rude and condescending; their only "outreach" seems to consist of telling us why they're right and we're wrong.; Opportunities to make contributions, including opportunities to engage...such as the opportunity provided by this survey. Arts. Music. Parks.;A city that supports the local community not companies that want to build ugly, un-affordable, luxury condominiums.; engaged;I'd love our government to listen to the people, not Washington. I would also love to continue the reduction of crime but at the same time, bringing fairness to the judicial system. ;A community type city where everyone is included in decision making. A safe place for immigrants as well resources for immigrants without status. ;Transparency--Be transparent about decision process for giving public money to private corporations; let residents know what information and data is shared with private companies (e.g. Amazon) in the hope of luring their business.;An equitable, eco-friendly, progressive city ;The wealth inequality in Durham mimics the rest of the US, and unless we take very deliberate steps to shrink that gap, we will never be a united city that welcomes everyone.  We need to up-end the 'property over people' mentality of planners and developers, and value and respect each life as equal to every other life.  That isn't true now--we throw away the creativity and intelligence of too many children who grow up in poorly maintained public housing, attend poorly resourced schools, because we accept the myth that some people have to be poor.  No one needs to be poor in a city as wealthy as ours.  ;Equitable, green, ;Small, local shops and restaurants. Historical homes, ; great food and entertainment, progressive transportation system.; food. ; lots of fun and nice bars and restaurants.  Not crowded, not crazy. Manageable.  ;I would like Durham become more of a mecca for food and culture.  Durham was the center of the Civil War surrender with troops on both sites waiting for the terms to be negotiated.  We should also bring that history and culture back to the city various cultures.; adequate and healthy (locally produced) food, and excellent education. ;No food deserts! Healthy food options in all neighborhoods. ;You should have talked to my neighbor before she moved out of state to live with her son and rent out her house because she "couldn't afford to live in it anymore." Why don't you leave us little owners alone.  If you want taxes, tax the $400,000 to million dollar mcmansions and leave us under $200,000 alone.  Use a tiered tax system for all these 20 year bonds and percent tax increases.  Oh, and go back to reappraisals every 10 years.  I can do math, I know that I'm paying more as you reevaluate my home every 3 years now and claim it's for my own good.;We have a great town; let's not let gentrification and corporate investment ruin it.;We need to come to grips with gentrification and what it really means.  This is not a problem unique to Durham -- success always creates displacement.  We to find a way to celebrate all the great things that have happened here over the past twenty years, not vilify those who have contributed to it or enjoy the fruits of our rebirth and at one and the same time find solutions for affordable housing and equity -- as diversity and inclusion are an important part of the character of Durham.;Concerned about gentrification of Durham and losing the historical components of the city - people and buildings.; and intentional investment (not gentrification) in working-class communities, so that people can stay in their homes.;Gentrification seems to be a big issue currently. House prices are rising very high.;There needs to be an effort by the city to keep the "gentrifiers are bad" notion out of the fabric of a growing and building Durham. This disparity of "been here's" and "just got here's" has got to stop before it becomes a giant divide. That is not a race issue, that is a attitude issue. When we first moved here, the Town and Gown disparity was very real.  It took an enormous effort, lots of money, and a giant scandal to bring that wall down, Many people lost their jobs.  Don't make Durham go through that again.  Bring in public relations people now and get that under control because not all Gentrifiers are wealthy, white, and privileged and that is exactly what is being promoted throughout town - even in the city government. Everyone talks diversity but by allowing groups to "hate" others, publicly, we are creating discrimination.  A town in the south should be far more adept at navigating issues such as this.  Durham loves to speak about "Diversity" when what they mean is "low-income, African-American".  Diversity is just that - people of all walks, colors, creeds, economic wealth, schooling, where they grew up, when they got to town, political position, sexual preference, renter, homeowner, parent, retired..... you get it.... and ALL of those people should have a voice, be treated with respect, and have their opinions count. ;a city that said no to gentrification and decided to support small businesses, especially businesses owned by black folks and by women (and by immigrants and LGBTQ+). ;My ideal Durham looks like a thriving diverse city that focuses on improvements while remaining committed to not pushing poor folks or folks of color out. My ideal Durham includes affordable housing. ;Concerned about gentrification, dealing with issues related to our (wonderful) growth. ; Young people feeling "left out," turning to gangs and drugs.;Open space needs to be preserved in all neighborhoods and in business districts.  ;green, walkable; Less building and more protection of green spaces. It’s getting too crowded and too many trees are being cut down. More tree plantings instead of cutting them down. More affordable existing housing. ;Trees, shade, walkable, ;Many trees, including more parks (including nature parks with protected forest) and tree-lined streets.  Great public transportation that connects us to nearby cities and to a thriving downtown. Hybrid buses.  Much less need for cars.; lots of trees and green spaces, public art, public meeting spaces that draw people, ;Plant more trees everywhere. Preserve existing small homes and bungalows near downtown. They’re part of what makes Durham charming. 5-story, stick-built “luxury” apartments are not making Durham attractive. When they’re 10-years old with peeling paint they’ll be an eyesore. Stop approving them. ;Public parks and green space.  Walkable neighborhoods.; Durham also should have generous public greenspace distributed throughout the city's neighborhoods that is accessible to all residents.  Many of these greenspaces would be connected with peaceful bike and walking paths separated from automobile traffic, an emerald necklace if you will.;More trees ;Lots of green space -- old trees, natural and intact ecosystems, a food forest, pollinator gardens. Supportive of farmers, local businesses, the arts.;My ideal Durham is green with many trees. We absolutely must do more to protect our existing canopy cover, for which Durham is so well known. Residential and commercial developments going in at present are certainly not doing that. We need more greenways  and parks, which are now not adequately funded by city and county. My ideal Durham is also a place of equality and with opportunities for people at all levels of the economic spectrum. Affordable housing and support are important.  My ideal Durham is also a vibrant alive place in downtown, which we are already beginning to experience, but must be balanced with affordability. ;They need to expand the scenery of Durham more than it has.; More plants. More POC. ;Trees, green space, friendly, diverse economically and racially.;Green with trees, with open spaces for communities to meet, ;There must be an end to terraforming as a technology for real estate development.  If the land is not suitable for development, maybe the best policy is to not develop it ever and determine its best form of permanent undeveloped open space.;I want trees and greenspace to be a vital part of the future of Durham;The ideal Durham would not seem so large and unfriendly if one could always see trees surround buildings, along sidewalks, in parking lots. It brings the visual scale down to a human size we are comfortable with. While living on Cape Cod I made friends that lived in New York City. They took the time and bore the expense to come to a place where there were trees. Trees make such an impact, whether environmentally or on a subconscious level.; More trees should be planted and the tree canopy respected—-no more clear cutting for development.;Urban trails and bike lanes are great, as are sidewalks, but again they need to respect traditional traffic and residential patterns.  ; Building up in the urban core while maintaining as much natural environment as possible. Lots of trees.;a green, walk-able, bike-able and easily accessible city; green spaces, trails; lots of reasonably-priced non-chain restaurants and cafes;  ; Lots of parks and green ways. Designated cycling lanes.;Lack of Greenspaces and also lack of thoughtful design and architecture w new construction.;green spaces. Public safety. ; I do wish the downtown had some additional public green space - I think that’s something that may be a regret as we grow. I’m also frequently frustrated by the lack of useful retail downtown. Shoe stores? A place to buy a winter coat? Underwear? Makeup? Durham has mostly boutique style shopping which is super unsatisfying and requires a lot of mall trips. I live in Forest Hills and would love to shop downtown as much as possible.;More green park space. Great cities have great parks and of course more trees. The more native the better.;There needs to be a comprehensive plan for development that takes into account open spaces and the arts and how people move through the city.  On a much bigger scale, we should look to Daniel Burnham's Plan for Chicago and The Plan of Nashville for inspiration on how to design for greatness.;Continued growth is good, but ensuring that it's not at the expense of residents with less wealth. Durham shouldn't become the next San Francisco. We have the opportunity to put good policy in place now to ensure that.; a community where everything is not concentrated downtown, but there are nodes containing commercial and retail operations surrounded by housing.  So everyone does not have to travel into the city to enjoy Durham, and parts of the county are not ignored because a few very vocal people want to live in the 19th century.  The residents of Durham County are not heard because they do not vote for city council members or the mayor, yet they are most affected by  actions that repeatedly oppose any kind of development in the northern part of the county.    ;Would love to see a high end grocery store and multi income housing option just south of 147 to increase foot traffic and safety from downtown (example: target with apartments like in chapel hill). Would love to see American tobacco trail expanded with retail and restaurants like Atlanta’s beltline. ;I think that Durham has passed the tipping point of luxury condo development.  I wonder when this type of development will stop or change.  Durham is starting to look a lot like other cities around the country.  I also feel worried about my child's high school and am considering moving to Chapel Hill or Carrboro because charters are so difficult to get into and our zoned district schools aren't satisfactory.;Durham is at a crucial tipping point in terms of growth. It feels like the city has a long way to go to update its infrastructure so it accommodates the influx of new residents.  ;We're still acting like a small town. Let's do what I noted above!;andNo more self storage or big box stores 'andmore small scale and community agriculture 'andNo more shootings;Less (or no more) high rises. More affordable (truly affordable) housing.;  Commercial clusters, strips of eateries, personal services, stores, a landmark feature such as a venerable tree and rock, sculpture, water feature, architectural Folly, mosaic, etc.   ;An ideal Durham would not impose uncharacteristic zoning or density on neighborhoods not designed for that kind of development.;With less of the BOX kind apartments that have been built. I am not against density but I really want more first class architecture and green areas. That is one of the things that has impressed me about Durham the green that you saw everywhere, You felt you were really breathing pure air. Yes I did miss restaurants in the old times but a balance is the right way. Demand from developers to keep green areas on their development or go somewhere else and become rich in another place packing as many apartment as they wish, Durham should not tolerate this. Fortunately the tallest building in Durham is now a pretty one. It shows that it could be done. I applaud the City Council on one thing which is giving the Fallon company the contract to develop the Insurance Building that later was used as the Police headquarters. Their proposal is very nice with nice green area. I think whoever has to approve of the plans should enforce more green areas and some city land should be developed as parks with interesting themes. That is in relation to growth. I do not like the amendment to the Zoning plan that was passed on Oct 1, which only gives "developers or want to be developers a free reign of the land. When someone said it will be monitors I really laugh because there were so many violations to the zoning that the city could not monitor, so now that it is ridiculous to think that now they will be monitor.;I am excited about all of the new development! I’m also thrilled with all of our restaurants - dining out in Durham is fun and delicious. ; It encourages healthy choices in food and exercise, and has relevant job training offered at community colleges and universities.; 5) a healthy physical environment to live in.  ;A place where the health, safety of residents is paramount;A place where the health, safety, education, and financial security of residents is paramount; where basic needs and dignity are not forgotten in favor of economic development.  ; healthcare (Medicare for all), nutrition, clean water,;A place where all lives are optimized;A place where every child learns and grows in an environment that promotes health, equity, creativity, and opportunity; ;2. **Protect beautiful things.**  I'd also love to see more protection of historical buildings and places, and more ways to highlight and publicize our history.;Preservation of the Historic Buildings and Sites. Modernization, i.e. the 27-story Building in Downtown, the DPAC, American Tobacco Campus, Durham Central Park, The NEW LIBRARY, The Durham Social Services building, New Courthouse, New Police Department,, The GoDurham Bus Station etc. I would like more development with some NEW Parks associated with Durham Park and Recreation. ; a place that values the natural world and historic buildings ;More preservation of historic neighborhoods. Refurbishment rather than mixed-income redevelopment. More public housing, not public-private partnerships. ;Continued preservation of history. More public education about the history of our city and spaces.;Downtown Durham used to be a combination of uniqueness combined with the nostalgia of a textile and tobacco town. Now it's just a nondescript City crowded with vanilla tall buildings crowded together. ;Preserved historic neighborhoods and areas, preserved affordability, ;As a native Durhamite, and one with a few years behind me, I would like for the historical and archival past, good, bad, and indifferent .... and the various perspectives on that past ... be respectfully remembered. It is a tricky business, but much can be learned about the human condition by looking honestly at the past of this area. This area has seen an indigenous population, an invasion by Europeans, slavery, the Civil War, segregation, integration, a tobacco based economy, a depression, world wars and other wars, racial tensions, wonderful universities and medical and research facilities, the emergence of new views and practices regarding gender, and architectural changes that are breathtaking. And the emergence of restaurants! I have not even mentioned the internet or team sports. What a life! Let us not forget any of it, but let us look at it all with kindness to others, rather than disrespect. Let kindness and respect guide us as we move forward.; And most importantly, a city with a rich history and sense of place. ;I worry about our historic fabric, with odd empty spaces that allow ideas to grow, houses of all sizes and prices, and the character of our city being erased for the sake of growth.;My ideal Durham has less homeless people on our streets, qualified teachers and supplies and books for our schools.; Homelessness is very high and there aren't enough resources for them to get back up on their feet. Public transportation isn't as accessible as it needs to be. I live in a lower income neighborhood in Durham off of Old Chapel Hill Rd and the closest bus stop is about a mile walk to MLK. The bus doesn't stop there often enough and doesn't go back by there enough. Plus I wouldn't want to walk that far in the dark by myself. It's extremely disappointing to me that transportation here hasn't really been upgraded enough- we need a light rail around the entire Triangle that connects to transportation to the Triad and Charlotte. As someone who has traveled to bigger cities a lot and mostly takes public transportation, Durham has turned into a place that badly needs to be sustainable, affordable and accessible when it comes to public transportation. If the Bay Area in California can have the CalTrain that goes all the way from San Francisco to the southern bay area run from early in the morning to late at night, then so should we. Duke had way too much of a chokehold on our public transportation, and when they voted no, it showed that they are corrupt, pure and simple. They only care about their money and nothing else. ;Panhandlers are very aggressive (can we employ them picking up trash?). Many shootings in east and south Durham. ;Homeless and beggars would not be allowed unless they were actually doing something for their earnings - like musical buskers - who would be permitted by the city. Bike lanes would be a standard part of every street and bike parking would be more readily available. There would be more parking without creating more flat parking lots - so all parking must go up. Parking should be considered a place to leave your car for many hours, treated like a luxury item and something people with cars should pay a premium to get, and the rest of the downtown area would be on foot.  Everything at pedestrian level would be for the public and require clear windows - no tinted, painted, closed in, or glass-block windows.  The "downtown doily" would expand beyond 147 to include Brightleaf, Golden Belt, the COOP and shopping and gathering centers south and north (Southside and Fullsteam areas).  Walking and biking should feel seamless and continuous from one end of the doily to the other.  ;The hopelessness that has developed ;9. HOUSING SUBSIDIES Where folks that contribute to the community significantly get some sort of housing subsidy that can be used in public or private housing. It could be tax incentives for the private entities and just a reduction in housing costs for the public housing or something like that.;Real affordable and safe housing (things the bond does not address). ;Where is the affordable housing for our millennial (young people) who are trying to work and/or go to college to hopefully provide a living for themselves in Durham.  Where is the whole notion of affordable housing in Durham.  People are moving to nearby counties so that they can have an affordable place; keep in mind they work in Durham but commute back and forth because they cannot afford housing in Durham.  Where is Durham?  Where is the History of Durham ?  Where will we find the Future of Durham?   ;strong and attractive public housing, and well-crafted urban design that corresponds to the public need and not the market dictates of developers’ private interests; have adequate housing, and access jobs and services via public transit. ; Affordable housing that's also beautiful.  Solar panels and cool roofs wherever possible.  ;All Durham residents have their basic needs met (ex. safe and healthy housing; healthcare;  access to hygiene products like diapers, period products, and adult incontinent supplies; feeling safe in their homes; access to healthy food, etc.). ;My ideal Durham is where can have decent housing and not have to worry about being slowly poisoning in your own home and not being afraid to let your child sleep in his or her room without having to check on them every few minutes to make sure they are ok.  Have a good school in your district for your child to attend and to also be sure they are safe in school also.;my ideal Durham has better public housing and less crime. No matter how much you build up Durham that will not change the core problems only will bring more. Durham is becoming over crowded and more congested. ;More low income affordable housing for people who make less than $32000;Stop building these expensive apartments where only doctors and lawyers can afford. Build more housing for people who make $32000 or less; sufficient affordable housing, medical care for all,;My ideal Durham includes affordable housing for people of all economic levels. It also includes a transportation plan that reduces building congestion on 147 and Roxboro Road. It also includes more walkable spaces and accessible parking in downtown. ;All spheres of influence collaborating to improve housing, transportation;A Durham with affordable housing for everyone, where people's basic needs are fulfilled. For example: proper transportation. ;A diverse city with affordable housing for all skill, education, income and age levels.  I'd like to see a Durham with integrated public transit where pedestrians and other non-automobile travelers can move safely and efficiently about all of the city, not just the downtown core.  ;There would be NO buildings assigned only to "affordable housing" which smacks of a housing project, but encourage, demand, or incentivize builders to include so much housing in every project to be dedicated to those in need. Sidewalks would be wide enough for 4 people abreast (so 2 couples could pass by going opposite directions easily). There would be sidewalks everywhere, on both sides of the street for people to walk easily and without concern or harm. There would be streetlights and lights from businesses to light the sidewalks at all times. ; And I want our public housing money to generate ownership of housing, not rental units that people can get kicked out of whenever.;We've created a culture of competition for housing, we've pushed out the working class and older generations from affording our city. We have to do something and fast, the city is rapidly transforming into the sterile, upper middle class white nightmare of Raleigh. ; Affordable housing and support are important.  My ideal Durham is also a vibrant alive place in downtown, which we are already beginning to experience, but must be balanced with affordability. ;More funding for housing or programs in the transition of the phases to give those that qualify for the ownership ; housing, and green spaces and tree coverage.  I emphasize that trees and green spaces are needed in order to create beauty in the city-scape.  This beauty attracts businesses as it attracts people and says, "We care about beauty in our city.";improve affordable housing options, and provide social services to those in need ;So glad the affordable housing bond passed. Litter is an ongoing problem and contributes to people's first impressions of the city.;More senior housing options.  Wake County (Cary in particular) has really nice apt buildings (Weatherstone Springs, Highland Village, Meadows at Brier Creek ) with sliding-scale rent depending on income.  Durham has only Maplewood Square and Kennedy House.;I'm concerned that Durham planners are being reactive and am glad so see efforts to think ahead.  I'd like to see fewer fancy and expensive condos going up and see more efforts to house those of us that are long-time Durhamites but well below medium income.  If I lost my house due to rising property taxes, there is nowhere here I can afford to live.  That is a sobering thought.;There are too many ugly, un-affordable, luxury condominiums. ; affordable housing, affordable commercial space, etc.;Durham, like a lot of cities, seems to struggle with creating affordable housing (small market rate options, as well as larger units targeted at families).  There seems to be a focus (because of the profit margin) on high-end midsize units.;comprehensive affordable housing and public services; ;I am pleased that Durham is focused on affordable housing. I would like to see Durham focusing on additional ways to ensure that people from all walks of life are able to thrive here. For example, ways to make Durham schools in different neighborhoods provide more equal quality of education and facilities, ; Programs that ensure all residents are housed and have adequate health and nutrition.; ;I strongly support efforts to increase affordable housing.  However, I worry that the Affordable Housing Bond will not be carefully administered, and that it will be captured by the development community to enrich themselves  instead of to provide affordable housing.  I would like to see careful evaluation of the EHC to determine whether it is actually promoting affordable housing instead of promoting market-rate housing to line the pockets of developers.;Ability to subdivide large lots and build tiny homes in backyards, etc. ;AFFORDABLE HOUSING! 1. That is number one. If there is not access to affordable housing nothing else good that the city or comprehensive plan does will be able to shine. Affordable housing could look like mixed income communities. It should also include community arts programs, growth and transformation programs, workshops (wood and metal building and fabrication),;Adequate housing in diverse neighborhoods. Good public transportation within the county and with CH and Raleigh. Safe bikeways, walkways, ;A lack of diverse housing options. A low density downtown that inhibits mobility and drives up development costs. The urban infill setback - a ridiculous regulation in a city that claims to be supporting denser housing in the urban tier and urban neighborhood character. The egregious amount of parking garages on space that could be used for ANYTHING else.;Durham should be an inclusive community of all people regardless of race, age or gender.;Comprehensive non-discrimination ordinance inclusive of trans people. Living wage for city employees and contractors. Strong plan for transit incentives and density and bike pedestrian connectivity. ;A diverse, thriving city where ALL cultures are welcome. A city that is rich in education,;The lack of leadership reflective of the citizens of Durham. Reactive leadership. Gentrification.;People of all ages, ethnicities, religion, and every other type of difference will interact in all phases of daily life - living in the same neighborhoods, working together, attending schools together. Durham will have open spaces that are not developed. Development will include the natural world by preserving and including good tree coverage. Good tree coverage will be promoted throughout the city so the natural world is in our daily lives. ;a community where everyone counts, including those who live outside the city but in Durham County.  One where even those who live in northern Durham have opportunities to shop, dine and enjoy their community without having to drive  at least five miles to do anything.  ;  ; religious freedom, literacy. ;An inclusive county with cultural amenities sprinkled throughout the county , not just downtown. A town that cares and supports both young people, adults, and the elderly.;Culturally diverse and inclusive; walkable and  easy to get around; ; the urban landscape should encourage cross-class and cross-cultural interaction, rather than discourage it. A large public sector should direct investment and jobs to the most vulnerable, and the local universities should be integrated more fully into the fabric of the city.;I do NOT want my city that I've lived in for 26 years to be a sanctuary city. That is illogical and dangerous and no one is held accountable or responsible for these decisions at the city level.;Inclusive, equitable, justice-minded, intersectional, working class welcome, affordable housing, less condos and luxury apartments, fair and kind landlords, homeless shelters that are welcoming to trans people, less restrictive busking laws,;space held for all kinds of people, focused on not just the urban core, walkable areas of interest, interesting structures (not just the same cookie cutter apartment buildings).;A place where religious freedom is without bounds, but where disrespect for others' religion is discouraged.  Accommodating for the handicapped. Clean energy oriented.  As climate change affects the coast, there will be an additional impact on the population here, and therefore on the infrastructure. We will need to look toward northern Durham County with infrastructure expansion, and hopefully with an eye to preservation of some wildlife habitat areas away from transportation corridors.;Diverse and everyone has a place at the table.;Businesses are not inclusive of all people whether entertainment ;My ideal Durham is inclusive and allows community members to interact with each other.;An inclusive, progressive, environmentally active city ;inclusive, artistic, collaborative;a city that EVERYONE can call home. ;Efficiencies in power and water use and infrastructure.;Buried electrical cables, walkable neighborhoods ;  A city that instead of being greedy, limits growth until after infrastructure (roads, schools, police staffing, etc.) is in place to support it.; Every center should have the local city services it needs - police and fire.    Outer areas should be more expansive, car-dependent, and less walkable.  There would be more farms and green land.  Houses would be allowed to be larger, farther apart, and density less.  Ideally, larger, expansive parks with walkways, rest areas, party shelters, and bike lanes.  Everything would be bigger and farther apart from the core of the doily.  There still needs to be focused centers of business and shops and along with allowing for manufacturing and distribution centers to be integrated within the centers or doilies focused only on manufacturing with public transportation readily available from neighboring areas.  The RTP is a good example of a focused and dedicated area but lacks the public trans to get people from the downtown doily  or Southpoint doily, where housing is dense, to there.  There could be several doilies of farming and several doilies of manufacturing not necessarily mixed together but side by side.  ;roads without potholes, gang intervention programs without police intrusion, sidewalks on busy roads (see also Horton),better infrastructure with electric and gas that's safe. ; efficient infrastructure and support structures to handle future growth;Straighter streets.  Reconfigure the Downtown Loop and 147 exits.  So confusing even if you live in Durham!;Less land use is devoted to automobile transportation and more to pedestrian, bicycle, and public transportation.  The nodes that developers have created "for transit" become even denser but more limited in extent to create economic use of transit stops.  Spatial connectivity of pubic transportation, including transit, improves service reach and frequency so as to create instead of frustrate ridership. The evolution of waste disposal strategies becomes a roadmap for retrofitting and migrating technologies across the entire Durham jurisdiction.;top notch Infrastructure maintenance,  and pot holes outlawed!  Durham should have a network of paved paths in its parks to allow citizens to exercise and safely  travel between neighborhoods.  ;Better street and road maintenance;Downtown is vibrant, but other neighborhoods -- particularly East and Northeast Durham need attention ;It is growing incredibly rapidly and seems to be leaving those that have called Durham home the longest behind. ;I wish that folks who occupied residents near downtown before the revival of downtown felt included downtown--whether socially or financially. ;Ideal Durham puts the people who live here above the people who want to make money here. Durham is already doing a lot of things well, but my ideal Durham looks like this!;It has been deeply upsetting to speak with residents of McDougald Terrace and hear their stories of unhealthy homes while watching City Council, the Mayor, and DHA pass the blame onto another nameless entity. McDougald Terrace is not the only DHA community with unhealthy housing. Families need to be moved to safe, healthy long-term housing immediately. OUR ENTIRE COMMUNITY HAS FAILED THESE FAMILIES and our community leaders need to take responsibility. ;If anything, I would love to see more minority owned businesses downtown. There doesn't seem to be a push for that any more and I'm not sure why. I would like to see more road maintenance and better transit options. ;My ideal Durham supports minority businesses and has safe spaces for children to learn and be creative. ;Walking scale communities require commercial, educational, cultural (including religious), and medical infrastructure and uses.  Having those and preventing differing uses from creating runaway development for which urban and suburban area need to find a solution.;An ideal Durham is one that has embraced dense, multi-use development and has made much of the downtown core accessible without cars, extending frequent public transportation access along its major corridors (i.e. BRT). I believe changes along these lines will help bring equitable opportunities to sectors of the city that have been overlooked.;Mixed-use development so people live closer to the places they want and need to go to. Easy-to-use and free public transportation. ;A place where natural resources are maintained and valued and in an expansive way; a green Durham; a place where building is for all people;**Protect beautiful things.** What measures can we take on public land to better protect wildlife habitats and stream buffers? How can we encourage developers or neighborhood associations to adopt similar measures (e.g., native plants ordinances, invasive plant removal days)? I'd love to see the city and county work with the local Audubon chapter to get Durham designated as a Bird-Friendly Community, which would be the first of its kind in the state if not the nation. I'd similarly love to see a program that encourages home and landowners cultivate their properties into wildlife-friendly habitats, which is very possible to do with a few simple-ish changes (see Doug Tallamy's work).;I want more room for natural forests ;  More natural spaces in general;, walkable neighborhoods with small commercial centers and pocket parks in each, low auto traffic, cheap available convenient public transportation, lots of sidewalks and walking and bicycle paths, ;A vibrant destination  marked by great architecture, inspired use of open spaces and a creative vibe (encompassing dining, the arts and entertainment) that reflects and celebrates a culture of diversity and inclusion. A place where you constantly get a sense of fresh and exciting new things happening every day.;andMore architectural character in new builds so you can tell a development in Durham apart from Anywhere, USA. 'andNew development that works with and respects the existing natural features on Greenfields rather than clear cutting, removing small wetlands, and mass grading.;Durham would be a series of doilies.  Any single doily would have a center to focus business and people gathering and surrounded by housing and livable space.  The doilies do not need to be the same size, nor does the center focus need to be more than a town square or park.  Look at Chicagoland - downtown has several focused, walkable areas, with high density that expand to more housing which then has neighborhoods with centers of business. Think concentric doilies.  People can live in a neighborhood within Chicago but get their pizza and dry cleaning  locally.  This expands out again to suburbs with each having their own neighborhood "feel" and city centers, and the density lessens outward from around each suburban center until you get to the next suburban center where housing gets more dense once again. ;, h backyard chicken ordinances that allow for roosters, more dog parks, fair property taxes that don't force people from their homes;Durham is already unique, but recent residential developments are going in at a cost of trees and green space. We simply do not need more cookie cutter neighborhoods that could be anywhere USA that bulldoze all trees in order to simply maximize profits for developers. ;Collection of neighborhoods with their own quirky personalities and history.  Intertwining walking paths, public transportation routes, parade routes, festival spaces.  ;My ideal Durham looks like a large small town with distinct neighborhoods, sidewalks, ;The majority of the recent Durham development is architecturally uninspired ugly boxes.  Just as malls are uniform and standardized Durham’s city center is becoming Anywhere USA.  These boxes are placed next to each other without interesting landscaping or vest pocket parks between them.  This style of development does not provide a way to create community and s dehumanizing.  The Durham Planning Department has not respected the character of existing neighborhoods and, in fact, seems to be in league with developers.  Mechanisms that exist in the present regulations that allow citizens to have a say in how their neighborhoods develop are not supported.;I don't like the cookie-cutter condos and apartment buildings going up downtown. They all look the same and it makes Durham look like every other mid-size city in America. I want interesting architecture with a unique sense of place. I'm concerned about neighborhoods like Forest Hills losing their character and beauty in the name of "affordable housing." I support everyone having decent housing they can afford, but I think developers are cashing in by branding their projects affordable housing. Those developers only care about making a profit and not what Durham will look like when they're done. I also worry about how long these condo and apartment buildings are going to last. What will happen to them in 10 years? Will they be empty and falling apart? The new comprehensive plan should maintain the character and look of historic neighborhoods like Forest Hills. ;I would love to see more integrated neighborhoods, less crime, more community events that cross socio-economic-racial lines. Less polarization between groups. ;Durham has many vibrant neighborhoods and communities throughout.  I believe we should focus on building up each neighborhood by establishing central areas within these communities that provide equal resources for each of them. A community center each neighborhood where residents can hold community engagement events, community specific festivals, accessible voting stations, community specific resources, a community garden, etc.  These central hubs will bring residents face to face and create a greater sense of community. Ideally it would house local emergency response personnel to further cultivate a positive relationship between the police and their local community. The community center could be the central hub for public transit in that part of the city. There could be circulators that run between these hubs and then micro-circulators that  run through the community.  I think people would be more interested in riding public transit if there were defined areas where they could meet to get on the bus or *hopefully* a rail system in the compact neighborhood system. Growth for each neighborhood would be organic and hyper localized around these centrally established community centers. I live in Old East Durham so obviously the Angier and Driver St. area would be perfect for this type of development. I have lived in the neighborhood for a year, but I don't know my neighbors. I have never interacted with local police and fire department. I don't know where any local resources are. I think we need to better establish the communities we have and find ways to promote hyper-local neighborhood cohesiveness and interaction.;A place that have a lot of dreams and that people that have thousands of good things happening.;Definitely poverty and safety and the multi-generational nature of poverty, violence, and trauma in our community. We need to stop the cycles of impoverishment and violence, and heal the trauma the remains.;I dream of a Durham where no one is poor:  all residents have equal security in their housing, good food, health care, education, recreation, transportation.  I dream of a Durham where one's race never impacts one's options in any of these things.  ;3. CREATIVE and MAKER SPACE I mention this in #1 as a part of creating home spaces. I return to it here because it is so important. I believe it can impact public health, economic development, education and even public safety for people to have a place to be creative and create. I think the public library is a great start and we an extend that to spaces like the Techshop that used to exist in Durham and the triangle. I think we are returning to a time when trades are appreciated, valued and needed more on an individual and small business scale.;WE ARE THE DURHAM BULLS. I think there should be more emphasis in YOUTH BASEBALL and the Goal to take a TEAM to Williamsport. Most Important we need to double-down on CLEAN AIR and CLEAN WATER. pollution and littering we can overcome with some rolled up sleeves and LEADERSHIP.;My ideal Durham has a wide variety of recreational and cultural activities, restaurants and hotels. It makes housing affordable  and job counseling available so that panhandlers are not at many street corners. ; small-scale retail all over, parks, family activity options, art - built around people, not cars.;shared experiences in sports, arts, and culture. A city that takes care of the earth, boasts ample green space, trails for walking and biking, playgrounds and fields, and reduces waste and recycles.;I love the Farmer's Market. It is a great community meeting space. I wish there were more meeting spaces like Durham Central Park in the northern portion of the county. It would be nice if Durham County considered supporting a museum or park up in the Northern High School spot when the school moves.;Downtown Doily: A bustling downtown, day and night, with shopping, art, restaurants and events designed to help bring more people to the area for a visit.  There would be a mix of retail options, museums and galleries, and plenty of places for people to gather - indoors or out. Green space should be incorporated and would be utilized for events or gatherings on a more frequent basis (no more giant swaths of area where only a Farmer's Market or a few baseball teams use it for a few hours a week and the rest of the time it's nothing).  Businesses and homes of all economic options would be housed together in buildings created to feel as though they have "always been" in Durham (so a little more attention to a historic look than a modern, sleek aesthetic).;A clean city with a variety of restaurants and activities, but looking for areas to cut spending and provide tax breaks for the taxpayers that pay for all of the amenities downtown.; Fun for all ages. Charm of old buildings,  yet there is still new developments. The Durham Bulls. ;more places of attraction and less crime.;  Intertwining walking paths, public transportation routes, parade routes, festival spaces.  Commercial clusters, strips of eateries, personal services, stores, a landmark feature such as a venerable tree and rock, sculpture, water feature, architectural Folly, mosaic, etc.   ; interesting places to explore and visit.  It should provide comprehensive public transportation ;More trails that connect with parks and other trails. And maintain some of the current paved trails like Ellerbe. Work with city and state DOT so that traffic does not prioritize commuters in residential areas. During weekends, side street traffic lights take a long time to turn green even though traffic on the main streets is light. Create a gear library run the city and or the county so that residents can check out anything from bicycles to skiing equipment. This way, residents that cannot afford gear or want to try it, can use it. Work with city and state DOT so that traffic does not prioritize commuters in residential areas. During weekends, side street traffic lights take a long time to turn green even though traffic on the main streets is light.; Affordable housing could look like co-working and office space, meditation and contemplative space that is also public, affordable childcare, event space for large and small scale events, places for people to just hang out and be loud (talking, drumming, playing loud music, etc.) which should all be affordable, accessible, maintained at the highest level and stewarded by people who have AND demonstrate deep love for all people especially under-served Queer, Black, Indigenous, People of Color and People with disabilities - demonstrated through their commitment to stellar customer service.;Racial bias would be a thing of the past.  The "Uneven Ground" Exhibit would be shown in  all the Elementary  Schools.; I would like to see more cooperation between local governments, nonprofits and businesses. There's too much emphasis on downtown affordable housing. Affordable housing is important but it needs to spread across the city and county. I expect my downtown to be expensive. It's downtown after all.;That any mass transit plan going forward should be Triangle wide, not just Durham;We need to develop a shared consensus about how to move from disparities across race, class and gender lines to more widely shared prosperity that involves those with greater resources contributing more to the solutions (especially via tax payments).;I worry there are too many in Durham who don’t have safe and clean housing, food, education and opportunity. I believe these shortfalls create safety issues and detract from Durham’s many successes and strengths. ;A welcoming community where everyone is valued, equipped and encourage to find their best self. A city that protects and nurtures its citizens and the environment we occupy.;The RTP is 93% Durham, but seen as a Raleigh resource.  We need to engage RTP leaders in the success of Durham -- downtown and county.;We need safe livable communities and a strong law enforcement presence. We need to get to the root of the problem instead of Band-Aid solutions to the criminal element. We need to staff up Investigation teams to combat the unlawful.;Safer. Diverse population. ;A safe, inclusive and diverse community ;Safe, well lit, walkable community with retail and restaurants to increase foot traffic. ;A place where people don't have to hear gunshots EVERY NIGHT.  Where taxes go DOWN instead of UP.  Where home values go UP and people aren't afraid to go out at night.  ;An ideal Durham, first and foremost is a safe place that I’m not worried about violence occurring ANY time a day. A place where I can enjoy all the town has to offer with my children and grandchildren without being afraid of being caught in gang violence.  Once that issue is resolved the ideal Durham will formulate itself.;A diverse community of people who want to lift each other hope, who are proud to work here, live here and send their schools here. It's a safe, nurturing and creative city. ;I love everything Durham has to offer. I live and work in Durham. As a WOC, I feel much more welcome here than in any other city in NC. The main problem I encounter is the lack of safety. A few days ago, there was a shooting right outside my job. I work at a place that is often included in the "Best Places to Work At in the US". I work in a "nice" building. I thought the sound I heard was hammering, I later found out it was 23 bullets being fired by quarreling gang members. That evening, after hearing about so so so many shootings in Durham, my spouse and I discussed moving to Cary and Morrisville. We don't want to move. My child goes to school in downtown Durham and I work in Downtown Durham. We live in South Durham. MY IDEAL DURHAM WOULD BE A PLACE WERE I FEEL SAFE FROM GANG VIOLENCE. PLEASE PRIORITIZE SAFETY. I HAVE TWO CHILDREN OF COLOR, I'M INCREDIBLY SCARED OF SO MANY SHOOTINGS IN DURHAM.;All spheres of influence collaborating to improve safety resources. More awareness, education and reduction of stigma surrounding mental illnesses and addictions. All Faith Based Organizations developing Mental Health Ministries to help those battling mental illnesses and addictions. More family support and especially single families.;A place where I can take a walk anywhere anytime without worrying about my and my family's safety.  A place with sidewalks to make it easy to jog and walk anywhere. ;My ideal Durham looks like a safe community, known for its independent restaurants; I dream of a Durham where there is no neighborhood that is labeled 'unsafe' by the economically secure, no neighborhood where people of color are constantly assumed to be out of place, no neighborhood where children are afraid of police.  ;Safe city, good business incentives, ;Safe to walk and bike. ;One without homicides and a new city council;Safe, economically diverse community ;Need comprehensive plan to address public safety issues, invest in infrastructure and public transit,;safe sidewalks and bike lanes. ;Just, safe, comfortable for everyone, affordable for all.;A vibrant and safe city for all citizens -- of every economic level, age and ability.;A nice place to live. It’s clean and safe and anyone can live here.;My ideal Durham is where all people are safe. By that I mean safe from violence. That means physical violence, gun violence, sexual violence, vehicle violence, traffic violence, and climate violence. We need infrastructure and systems set up so it's safe, possible, OK, accepted, and feasible to walk, bike, take transit, and if needed, drive in Durham.  ;A safe and diverse community with opportunities for everyone to succeed in their goals.;safe, inexpensive, unpretentious, ;I imagine Durham a city where you can move freely without fear, walking enjoying murals that reflect history because gentrification is erasing and/or displacing those who have built communities. ;A safe space for everyone, new and established,  to express their interests, their talents, and allows them to thrive anywhere in the County.  ;Safety;My ideal Durham would be a place with not a lot of violence where we can feel safe and not worry about anything ;A place with more security because it used to be safer; that's why I moved here;Insecurity and discrimination;More street safety;A community with widely shared prosperity in which every citizen has:  1) opportunities for public education from birth through adulthood, 2) access to quality, affordable housing, ;How to stop white flight from the public schools -- it's hurting all of us. ;All spheres of influence collaborating to improve  education and public health ;A city with better relationships with the universities in the area.  A city with efficient transportation corridors.  ;A place where the education, and financial security of residents is paramount; where basic needs and dignity are not forgotten in favor of economic development.  Public parks and green space.  Walk-able neighborhoods.;I worry about losing our community's most talented teachers to the school system in Chapel Hill; I fear a "brain-drain" if the trend continues.; higher quality schools, well paid teachers,  covered bus stops, h;Poor quality public schools. ;  The increasing crime rates and lack of useable greenways (because of said crime). ;What would ideal Durham look like? A place with the cultural and intellectual and professional opportunities that come with a city, but the convenience and comfort and friendliness of a town. respected employment for those who are able,; good schools across the city; unbiased criminal justice system and public servants.;Good public schools for every child.;Better education for all.;  Better transit between Durham, Raleigh and CH.;Even though my children went to Public Schools so did I. Went every day to school and volunteer. Most of the teachers I dealt with were good and some great and at the end my children did fine, but I did encounter a lot of resistance for getting rid of some pretty bad teachers to retire. It was not easy but I did my homework and was able to do it with the great help of absolutely great superintendents.;Schools with better performance;more schools;I want Durham to name, and fund, the basic human rights to shelter, food, health care, education so that EVERYONE in Durham can thrive.;to provide comprehensive services for the homeless and mentally ill, services for low income youth or youth with housing or food insecurity,;Proliferation of panhandling and homelessness - an indicator that we are not providing needed social and health care services to residents. Out-of-towners spray painting rental houses on my block while they claim to be fighting gentrification and displacement.;All people deserve trees in their neighborhoods. Clearcutting and grading native plants and then replacing them with exotic nursery stock that is "just the right size", evergreen, and "low maintenance" does not create a sustainable environment.;Because global warming is going to affect everyone across the planet, and everyone in Durham, I think it's critical that the city and county governments do everything possible to address it.  We don't have time to wait.  In this context, I'm concerned about how developers are allowed to remove so many trees, often clear cutting.  We need trees to protect against climate change, flooding, pollution, and warming temperatures.  I'm also concerned about air pollution in Durham, given how many people are moving here and how many more cars there are on the roads.  I love Durham.  It is a fantastic city.  I want to protect its beauty and vibrancy and diversity and quirkiness.;Green, cool, healthy and clean; prioritizes clean energy, public transit ;More dense walkable neighborhoods in central city, suburban development that’s sensitive to environment, more transportation options (buses, bike lanes), development that lets people walk more and drive less.;My ideal Durham is a Durham that has realized all 17 of the UN Sustainable Development Goals by 2030.  globalgoals.org;Sustainable with environmentally friendly growth and diversity ; Durham has green spaces, community gardens, and is committed to renewable energy and public transportation. Durham supports the arts--by supporting small, local, community theaters and galleries; by making it possible for artists to rent space and be accessible without relying on ticket sales or donations to keep them going. (I'm saying we love DPAC, but that is not local theater!). ;Green- lots of nature, only allowing environmentally friendly products to be used at grocery stores, take out restaurants etc. More composting and recycling.;Large sections of healthy forest green space, rooftop gardening and clean energy;I want Durham to value sustainability ;My ideal Durham is on track to becoming part of the ecosystem instead of being imposed on the ecosystem.  It abounds in native trees that offset the seasonal extremes and in native under-story and ground-cover plants.  Substantial urban land is devoted to small-scale local agriculture and offsetting of what now are food deserts. Instead of widespread lawns of invasive or exotic grasses, there are reconstructed prairies (savannas) of native grasses and wildflowers. Native plants are managed with the animals that consume them. The land uses result in a reduction to elimination of herbicide and pesticide use. More trees shade the remaining asphalt and concrete surfaces.  Where there is less tree cover, solar energy generation is encouraged. An appropriate region-wide plan for appropriate wind generation with the landscape drives the location of wind generation facilities in the landscape. Land use facilitates shortening the distance between distributed power generation for small loads and intensified power generation for large industrial-scale loads. A vision of water management over combined public and private properties in the landscape looks for ways of combining both large-scale infrastructure and distributed storm water management within watersheds to meet local water usage, graywater recycling, and wastewater processing needs.;I want Durham to be forward-thinking environmentally. When the city plants flowers, shrubs, and trees, they choose native plants. Songbirds are in decline across the country. Many species are down 30-70% since 1970.  We have to help. Native plants provide sources of food and shelter for local birds that non native ornamentals just can't. Oak trees support more than 500 species of caterpillars. Gingko trees support zero. When new buildings go up, are they designed to reduce bird-window impacts? Can we dim the lights at night? Millions of birds die every year in this country by colliding with windows. Proper design up front is so much cheaper than retrofitting later. My "big idea" is to see the city of Durham get certified as a NWF Wildlife Habitat. The National Wildlife Federation has certified more than 200 communities so far. Certification requires a certain amount of city space (parks, schools, churches, and private residences) be wildlife friendly: provide food, water, and shelter for a variety of animals. This is not necessarily hard to do. My small property is certified. The cities of Charlotte, Asheville, and Cary are certified. With the support of the mayor and the City Council I know we could do it.;My ideal Durham looks like: Significant investment in reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Housing density in the urban center,;Durham is changing fast, and our infrastructure needs to not only catch up but be resilient in a rapidly changing climate. Protected bike network and trail and greenway infrastructure, transit options including rail, storm water management, protecting green spaces and increasing the tree canopy (especially in underserved communities), and commitments to renewable energy all need significant investment.;A locality where city and county-owned vehicles run on electric or low emission engines.;sustainable, and affordable - ;A place with clean air and water with enough affordable — and well-built — housing for everyone. ;4. FARMS and SUPPORT for FARMERS Like greenhouses and support for  what farmers need because they feed us. As climate change does it's thing we are going to want all our farmers to have ALREADY developed techniques and solutions to increase the quality and quantity of their food supply if we need it.;More frequent recycling and compost would be great!;Well, see above.  I'm tired of talking about "affordable housing".  All that means to me is driving me OUT of my house.  I have a 15.00$ an hour job.  I work two jobs.  I saved my money working many more jobs at the same time so I could get a down payment on an 1100 sq./ foot fixer upper.  Now, every year it's more money just to stay in the house.  You raise my property tax, if you don't raise the tax percent then you raise my home value effectively raising my tax.  You raise my tax on water, my tax on waste collection. The state allows electricity rate hikes, insurance rate hikes and raises the taxes on phone and TV services.   Then you finance everything in Durham with bonds, raising my property taxes again.  I don't have internet in my house, I used to go to the library to do surveys like this.  But, you created a bond, closed my library for 3 yrs, gave me no services, and I have to pay for it in my property tax.  It's crazy. Now you create another bond to pay for OTHER people to get help to buy a house and get affordable housing.  So you take my money again with a raise in my property tax for some one else's affordable housing. What about MY affordable housing.  I did everything right and responsibly with no help from government agencies and this is my reward? ;  It irks me that we lose out on the potential city resources that being able to tax Duke University and Medical Center, churches, other non-profits would give us.  I'm tired of us spending so much of our money on the downtown area--it's time to spend money in East Durham, in the neighborhoods where DHA has units.  ;The mining of high property values for the tax base, based on arbitraging the price discrimination across "exclusive" communities and "bad" communities has not contributed to either infrastructure financing or improvement of communities.  It has not reduced human services and law enforcement costs nor improved lives.  We are in fact one community that depends on justice in order to have low government costs.  Integrating cultural communities while at the same time allowing development of unique community cultures is one of the most exciting and creative prospects facing the Durham community.  A comprehensive plan need not specifically force this direction but it needs to do no harm to this evolution of neighborhoods happening.;Homes or buildings identified as "churches" should actually have to function as a church and not as a tax-free haven.;A Durham in which one can get around without the expense or pollution A Durham in which one can get around quickly, cheaply and practically without the expense or pollution of a car, and driving has become a minority mode of travel rather than the default; a Durham in which the city’s master bike plan is built out, allowing for transportation and recreation on foot, bike or by alternate modes of transportation (e.g. electric bike or scooter), increasing the effectiveness of transit (bus, rail) networks, cutting short-distance trips, increasing public health and setting a model for the state and country; ;  Now I have traffic hours on my street and by the school bus stop in the dark mornings.  Your push to open the road ways and connect every thing only brought traffic cut throughs to our neighborhood.  Your plan to expand the bus line brought a huge up serge in crime.  My neighborhood used to be described as a "jewel" in Durham, now it's not.;3) access to a public transit system that provides mobility, 4) the opportunity to find good jobs with living wages and benefits, ; people-powered transportation only, pop-up shops, a little playground even?;All Durham residents have their basic needs met (ex. transportation to places they need to go; education;  etc.). ;My ideal Durham is a vibrant, well-connected city where people from different walks of life intermingle and together create beautiful things (e.g., arts, innovative businesses) ;We need a new mass transit plan -- but one that connects the three corners of the Triangle through RDU.;Walk-able streets, electric street cars running down the middle of all major roads like Club Blvd. Trolley, bicycle and pedestrian access only downtown. Buses on outlier routes all electric as well.  Subway and elevated electric trains to RDU, etc.;My ideal Durham has many sidewalks, safe parks and a light rail system. It also has many green spaces and isn't overrun with luxury condos and hotels.  ;sound transportation options, lower crime rates, ;Lots of support for noncar travel and affordable housing. ;and Really, truly, walk-able, scooter-able, and bike-able (to the grocery store, work, entertainment, etc.). With complete sidewalk systems and separated bike and scooter lanes along nearly all roads and supplemented with trail systems. This involves filling in lacking sidewalk and bike systems but also focusing growth in a mixed use way.;My ideal Durham has sidewalks, bike lines, and safe bus stops (with paved waiting area, not just the shoulder) on all major roads. New condos should have adequate parking for residents and some guests, freeing up street parking for others. High-density housing is fine but should have some green spaces interspersed. Existing roads should be widened or have turn lanes added to accommodate new developments. ; Denser and better served by transit than it is currently, and with a greater focus on working-class jobs and support institutions. High-tech manufacturing should be interspersed with other uses within residential neighborhoods, ;Need to account for the growth with more roundabouts and realistic public transportation. We are in a research triangle that where each part is 15 miles away but it can take an hour to get from one to the other. Light Rail connecting everything would be the ticket but minimally dedicated bus lanes would be a start. ; Easy to find parking, plenty of affordable and safe parking garages. ;And since grocery stores are not downtown and public transit is limited, people are forced to drive where food and other amenities are, hence the monolithic cement parking structures needed to store vehicles.; Our public transportation and walkability are very poor. I live 2 miles from my place of business. Using the bus to get there somehow takes 25 minutes, including a 15-minute walk to the bus stop via a route that does not have a continuous sidewalk. ;safe transportation (on foot, bicycle, motor vehicle, etc.) for everyone. A low crime rate and an empty jail. A place where people drive carefully when near cyclists or pedestrians. Forgiveness is practiced and encouraged between people, on the road and off; but the design of roads and bikeways and walkways should also be "forgiving" of drivers and others whose carefulness varies.;Easily accessible amenities for all aspects of life, easy to get around, excellent schools, ;With so many people having mobility issues my idea Durham looks like seats at bus stops higher walking distances to stores businesses closer or more accessible restaurant and other businesses catering to wheelchairs and walkers;Free and expansive public transportation network. Car-free downtown. Innovative homeless and bridge housing programs. A public housing system that is actually well-maintained and somewhat desirable to live in. ;Increase city parking fees and car tax rates to fund public transportation infrastructure;Also - don't be afraid to try something bold.  Close the downtown loop to car traffic.  make it pedestrian and bikes only.  Change 147.  Look for every opportunity to make new spaces for people to move across town outside of single car traffic.;  Integration across neighborhoods is important - it impacts the economy, crime, affordable housing, etc...  Part of that is transportation (north-south and east-west) connections, whether bus, rail, bike or pedestrian.  Durham has some central identity but could go much further.  To do that you have to create space for people to be out and engaged.; where they can live relatively free of the hassles of  traffic, and an unaffordable cost of living.;walkable and bikeable, vibrant, healthy,;More bikes than cars, clean, modern, compact.;The denser we get, the better our public transit solutions like the bus will perform and the more useful micromobility will be. The denser we are, the more modes we can support, especially walking!;An extensive bus system that is free so people can get anywhere they want and need to go. Free parking downtown. A big convention center, better than the Marriott. More small retail shops. ;accessible mass transit and a criminal justice system striving to eliminate racial and income bias. ;Unlike many people, I don't mind paying for parking and appreciate the mobile-friendly pay parking around town.  Since I work in Chapel Hill, the only improvement would be if the 2 used the same parking service so that I only need one app on my phone!  I'm also incredibly disappointed at the demise of the light rail project.  I come from a city with light rail and although there are those snobby people who won't condescend to take public transportation and drive single occupancy vehicles, I used it all the time and was really looking forward to being able to do so again.  Unfortunately, if I wanted to take the bus to work without driving to a park and ride lot, it would be a 2 hour commute each way and I'm not willing to give up 4 hours each day for that.;All modes of transportation supported: sidewalks with safe cross-walks over streets, a connected network of bike lanes physically protected from motor vehicles. Frequent, affordable, comfortable public transportation. Automobile use of streets de-emphasized, like in Amsterdam. Excellent schools (pre-K through 12).;better connected to chapel hill and Raleigh while being easy to traverse to get things in town so we don't HAVE to go to chapel hill or Raleigh unless we work there.;make it easy to move across! make sure neighborhoods have what they need: library, pharmacy, grocery store.;Smooth roads, more sidewalks, more traffic light controlled left turn lanes where needed, fully staffed police and fire Departments ;6. PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION This was listed also in number one but you already know this is a major need.;Easier access via transport, greenspaces, sidewalks and bike lanes.;Hardly any traffic, lots of options for getting around. ;The population is growing. We need more transit options to connect the triangle!;All parts of Durham as well as Chapel Hill and Raleigh would be accessible by a variety of public transportation of some type which would be available at least 15-18 hours per day;Rules and regulations for anything like bikes and scooters or anything else. They should all be advertized in the television  so people that not obey them can be fines for sure.;expanded pedestrian core, linked to rest of region by congestion-priced roads and fixed guideway rapid transit. Oh, and market-priced parking downtown, instead of the current blank-check subsidy to drivers. ;They don't want to give (driver's) licenses to hardworking and responsible people ;; Actual, usable, dedicated bike lanes that make biking doable. PLEASE REPAIR CITY STREETS. THEY’RE DISGRACEFUL AND MADDENING. ;Safe bike routes and public transit. Parks of all kinds, trails and open public spaces for all to enjoy. Natural areas and tree cover.; Bike lanes on all major roads (Club, Duke, Roxboro);. Lots of bike lanes. Almost like a garden city. ; an emphasis on bikeability, and convenient transportation between nearby city hubs (Raleigh, Chapel Hill, Cary, Morrisville) to reduce traffic. ;A bike friendly city where cyclists do not have to risk their lives riding on painted lanes without protection from vehicles. Separate bike lanes are preferred. And make sure they are painted or clearly marked when bike lanes share sidewalks.;Bus system that allows transfers along routes instead of limiting bus changes to downtown hub.;All bus stops need shelters, due to unpredictable weather changes. Channel funds raised from failed train line towards this project. ; Free bus system like Chapel Hill. Expansion of Urban ministries to help address issues of poverty and homelessness. ;I'm a bike commuter and the city buses often have _awful_ black exhaust that makes me want to avoid biking behind buses because I don't want to breathe it. Why is our public transportation so dirty?;need more and better parking options like parking garages, need more attention to green space ;Driver behavior is not good;The traffic and increased taxes has become a burden for all but especially those homeowners in the over 55 age group. The people I talk to want to move away from Durham due to the items mentioned above. ;Keeping what we already have except for the downtown loop.; Ample parking, no traffic, and a walk-friendly city. ;There should be more parking meters and parking on street should cost more than parking lots. Enforce tickets.;The traffic planning has not been met for the growth of the city, particularly out Guess Rd. by Highway 85.  ;Need comprehensive plan to reduce traffic congestion, improve public schools,;Semi-underground parking decks with top surfaces used for public space (green space, playgrounds, craft fairs, small scale performance space, rallies).;A place where intercity transportation is provided via creative forms of transportation such as monorail, maglev or underground transportation technology provided by Elon Musk’s Boring Company. Use Durham as test city to lower costs if needed.; Frustrated re: the light rail failure.;Living in Raleigh, wondering if I wouldn't be happier in Durham. Pretty peeved the light rail project exploded. ;It's disturbing to see new luxury residences being built (some costing $500,000+) while there are neighborhoods full of crumbling houses and pot-holed streets a few miles away.  The County recently pledged $3 million to Merck Pharmaceuticals--is this the best way to support residents when so many are in immediate need?;Class and race segregation is on the rise. Communities currently beset by crime on one hand and gentrification on the other need greater access to public resources, so people can make ends meet where they are.;Durham can be both spit up in groups. Durham can be nice and dirty  like many different bad situations. There can be nice parts in Durham were like everything happens;Sidewalks on University,  CH Blvd.;need more and better  well-maintained sidewalks that connect neighborhoods to downtown;I want to shut down Main street through downtown and make it a pedestrian mall. Tree canopy, ; sidewalks and well connected via public transit.; Sidewalks!!! On both sides of all streets in city limits. Duke, Gregson, Roxboro, mangum changed to 2 way streets ;Similar to how it looks now. Walkable,  inclusive,  ;It would be a walkable city with good public transportation,  ;I find it very hard to get around Durham. It is not pedestrian friendly. My neighborhood is full of strangers.;A walkable Durham, where pedestrians can walk safely downtown and in the city neighborhoods. A city where pedestrians don’t have to risk their lives to cross intersections because vehicle drivers are turning right without stopping or run red lights on a regular basis.;Serious pedestrian impediments and safety concerns. Need to change culture regarding trash, littering, etc.;The lack and disrepair of sidewalks.;A walkable, thriving city that is dotted with pocket parks and built to the human scale. Lively streets with trees, cafe tables, people...;Friendly, walkable, green, ;Diversified economy with opportunities for all skill levels. Strong Durham Tech supporting workforce development. Abundant affordable housing with a strategy to keep people housed and introduce more affordable housing. ; A city that is rich in  living wage job opportunities and minimal crime. A city that police and neighborhoods have a good relationship free of harassment. ;Lack of jobs that pay an affordable wage that are accessible to all Durham citizens (i.e. public transportation).; Employers will offer adequate pay for workers to support themselves well, and will offer appropriate benefits for all workers.;A community with many jobs that allows citizens of all economic levels and races to participate and live around a vibrant downtown. A community that honors its past and looks to the future. A vibrant, economically diverse Hayti is a big part of this vision.;A city with a backbone of blue collar prosperity and strong public investment. ; opportunities for employment, and where they can live relatively free of the hassles of crime, ; a place where every adult has access to the goods, services, and employment opportunities they need; and a place where older adults have access to food, care, and meaningful social interaction.;ample affordable housing near living wage paying jobs.  Business ownership will reflect the diversity of the city (minority ownership).  ;7. CHILDCARE and YOUTH PROGRAMS Free and low cost. Employ educators and artists!;more kid stuff;Support young people with mentors, schools, resources, involvement;Worried about interesting and safe places for children (2-18) to play as downtown gets stuffed with large apartment buildings. Where are the kids supposed to go to play in fresh air!?;  There are low to no cost youth programs consisting of athletic, cultural and STEM options.   Transparency in city planning with community input and participation in planning.;and Fill in the sidewalk gaps so I can take the bus (or get exercise) without getting hit walking on the road!;Check the research... people (even children, elders and everyone in between) that have access to art and creativity have a better quality of life this is found across disciplines that study such things and is true whether the creative outlet is music, dance or sculpture.;I bet you'll help people into houses and then they will have to move back out too, just like my neighbor. Just because you can buy a house doesn't mean you can afford to keep it in Durham!; ;Less violence by helping provide needed resources to those that need and want to get out of poverty. ;Not this!;